The Project Gutenberg eBook of Twenty-five years in the West, by
Erasmus Manford

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Twenty-five years in the West

Author: Erasmus Manford

Release Date: July 19, 2023 [eBook #71224]

Language: English

Credits: Sonya Schermann, Craig Kirkwood, and the Online Distributed
         Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
         produced from images generously made available by The Internet
         Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-FIVE YEARS IN THE
WEST ***


Transcriber’s Notes:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics.

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *




TWENTY-FIVE YEARS IN THE WEST.


  BY ERASMUS MANFORD

  CHICAGO:
  E. MANFORD, PUBLISHER.
  1867.

       *       *       *       *       *

  TO
  MY CHRISTIAN FRIENDS
  IN THE WEST,
  _WITH WHOM I HAVE LIVED_
  AND LABORED MANY YEARS,
  THIS VOLUME
  IS DEDICATED

  THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER I.

  PAGE 9.

  Parentage and Childhood; “Lord” Timothy Dexter; At School; In
  Haverhill; Shoemaking; Early Aspirations; Converted; Must be a
  Minister; On a Plank; Attend School; A Long Walk; Studies with J. C.
  Waldo and Dr. Cobb; First Preaching; With W. S. Balch; First Tour;
  First Debate; Came out Second Best; Talk with an Englishman about
  American Coarseness; Conversation on Slavery; In Maryland; Talk with
  an Episcopal Clergyman concerning Endless Woe not being Taught in the
  Old Testament; Traveling and Preaching on the Eastern Shore; Return
  to Baltimore; A Storm; Where Truth Flourishes and Where it Does Not;
  Another Location; Self and Faith Abused; Preach in Harper’s Ferry,
  Charleston, Winchester, Va.; A Hard Battle; Cross the Alleghany
  Mountains.

  CHAPTER II.

  PAGE 33.

  In Pittsburg; S. A. Davis, Wife and Daughter; The West; Preach
  in Pennsylvania and Ohio; Western Reserve; Talk with a Bigot;
  Conversation on a Steamboat; Forbidden to Preach; Grave Creek; A
  Mound; My Study; What is Salvation? Proceedings in Bainbridge; Mud;
  In Cincinnati; General Harrison; In Rising Sun; Patriot; Preach in
  Louisville, Ky.; E. M. Pingree; On the Mississippi River; Preach in a
  Steamboat; In New Orleans; Battle Ground.

  CHAPTER III.

  PAGE 47.

  A Sea Voyage; A Meeting at Sea; Tornado; Strange Vessel; In Texas;
  Travel to Houston; Hard Fare; The Country; Sleeping on the Ground;
  Very Thirsty; Must have Water; Colorado River; Sound Asleep on its
  Banks; Cross the River on Logs; Corn Cake; A Surprise; In Houston;
  General Houston; The Attorney-General of Texas; San Jacinto Battle
  Ground; A Pandemonium; Buck Wheat Cakes; Embark for New Orleans; A
  Condemned Vessel; On Allowance; In New Orleans; A Contrast; Ague and
  Fever; Up the Mississippi.

  CHAPTER IV.

  PAGE 55.

  Labors of E. B. Mann; N. Wadsworth; Owner of a Horse; Preach in
  Indiana and Kentucky; A Profane Life; General Clarke; Atheism; The
  Eyeless Fish; A Presbyterian Minister’s Wisdom; No Hell, No Heaven;
  Travel in Ohio; Another Preacher Replies; Labors in Dayton; D. R.
  Biddlecom; George Messenger; R. Smith’s Somersault; J. A. Gurley;
  George Rogers; Start for Indiana; Battle in Harrison; Universalism
  an Old Doctrine, and of God; Partialism an Old Doctrine, but of
  Satan; Grove Meeting; Father St. John: Badly Treated; John O’Kane
  on his Creed; In Indianapolis; A. Longley; A Horse; Questioned by a
  Methodist; In Terre Haute; Very Unpopular.

  CHAPTER V.

  PAGE 74.

  Journey in Ohio; Intemperance; General Baldwin; In Columbus; Death
  Penalty; How to Deal with Offenders; Preach in Newark and Zanesville;
  Hell Discussed; Mrs. Frances D. Gage; Invited to Settle in Marietta;
  W. H. Jolly, In Chillicothe; Opposition in Richmond; --. Webber; In
  Kentucky; Dr. Chamberlin; Opposition in Lexington; Is Universalism
  Infidelity? A Slanderous Story by a D.D.; In Paris; Excursion to
  Patriot; A Discussion; Daniel Parker; Cure the Ague; Good Health.

  CHAPTER VI.

  PAGE 87.

  A Journey East; Talk with a Baptist Minister; Preach in Delaware and
  Centerville, Ohio; W. Y. Emmett; Doors Closed; A. Bond; A. B. Grosh;
  In New England; On the Sea; A Storm; Methodist Preacher Frightened;
  Blow the Trumpet; In Philadelphia; In Delaware; In Pittsburg; Return
  to Cincinnati; Go to Chicago; Bad Roads; In Richmond; Talk with
  a Quaker; A Spirit Returns to Earth; A Spirit Out of the Body; A
  Strange Sight; Preach in God’s Temple; Preach in Chicago; Preach in
  Joliet; Aaron Kinney, an Early Preacher; Bill of Fare; Hard Luck in
  Magnolia; Why Preach; In Hennepin; Political Humbugs; Opposition in
  Washington; Justice of God; In Pekin and Tremont; Frozen; A Preacher
  Replies.

  CHAPTER VII.

  PAGE 103.

  Located in Lafayette; The Christian Teacher Commenced; A Circuit;
  Society Organized; Meeting-house Built; All Alone; Conflict in
  Frankfort; Old Testament Doctrine of Punishment; Debate Proposed
  in Frankfort; Discussion in Independence; Character of my Sermons;
  Slander Refuted; Debate in Burlington; Endless Woe; Some Voting; The
  Use of Discussion; A Traveler.

  CHAPTER VIII.

  PAGE 119.

  Debate in Lafayette; Die in Adam; Alive in Christ; This World and
  World to Come; Battle Ground; In Monticello; A Reply; A Preacher
  Whipped; D. Vines; S. Oyler; I. M. Westfall; B. F. Foster in Indiana;
  Revival Poetry; Ladoga Camp-Meeting; Worship; In Michigan City; An
  Episcopal Preacher; A Wet Ride; Debate in Dayton; Discussion in
  Jefferson; Everlasting Punishment; End of the World; Second Coming of
  Christ; Eternal Life; Meaning of Everlasting.

  CHAPTER IX.

  PAGE 140.

  Questioned J. O’Kane in Dayton; He Beat a Retreat; He Replied in
  Crawfordsville; Three Resurrections, National, Moral, and Immortal;
  Conversation in West Lebanon; Everlasting, Forever; Kingdom of
  God; Sin, Error, Suffering not Endless; In Southern Indiana; Why
  Live a Christian Life? Bigotry in Breckenridge; Discussion with
  Mr. Dickerson; Calvinism; Arminianism; Universalism; Debate in
  Chambersburg.

  CHAPTER X.

  PAGE 161.

  Move to Terre Haute; Lecture in Fort Wayne; A Discussion There; Dr.
  Thompson; Visit Illinois; Opposition; Discussion in Charleston;
  Prayed For; Called Infidel; Debate in Green Castle; Conditions of
  Salvation; God’s Will; All are Spirits; Form of the Teacher Changed;
  J. Burt and J. H. Jordan, Editors; Oliver Cromwell; Foundation of
  Character; In Many Places; A Celebration; Meeting in the Rain; Fourth
  of July Celebration; Debate in Martinsville.

  CHAPTER XI.

  PAGE 172.

  Journey into Northern Illinois; Temperance Lecture; Result of
  Temperate Drinking; Married; Homeward Bound; High Waters; Difficult
  Traveling; Trouble in Crossing Streams; A Cold Bath; End of the
  “Bridal Tour”; A Hard Ride; Debate with E. Kingsbury; In Northern
  Indiana; Conversation with an Indian; Dark Man and Dark Night;
  Explanation of Hebrews ix. 27, 28; End of the World; The Earth and
  Man.

  CHAPTER XII.

  PAGE 193.

  Discussion in Franklin; Justice of God; What the Gospel Is; Society
  Organized; Discourse on Total Depravity; Conversation with a
  Presbyterian Minister on Christian Rewards; Talk with a Catholic;
  A Methodist; A Presbyterian; A Campbellite; Salvation; A Mormon
  Sermon; Reply to It; A Journey to Louisville and Cincinnati.

  CHAPTER XIII.

  PAGE 213.

  Move to Indianapolis; Extensive Traveling; Henry Ward Beecher; A
  Fossiled Calvinist; Supposed to be an Orthodox Preacher; Debate
  in New Philadelphia; Strife Between the North and South; The Old
  Convention Dead; The New Convention Organized; Discussion in
  Springfield, Ill.; Abraham Lincoln; God is Love; Is Merciful; Is
  Just; Is Holy; Travel in Illinois; Conversation with a Presbyterian
  Clergyman on the Origin of Hell; In Iowa City, and Other Places in
  Iowa; Home Again; W. J. Chaplin; Discussion with Benjamin Franklin;
  Debate in Covington; Discussion with Mr. Russell; Publish the “One
  Hundred and Fifty Reasons”; Review of “Universalism Against Itself”;
  Publish Another Book; Olive Branch Discontinued; Travel Far and Near.

  CHAPTER XIV.

  PAGE 231.

  Conclude to go to St. Louis; Commence the Golden Era; Association
  in Crawfordsville; Debate in Dayton; Man in God’s Image; God the
  Father of All; Man Immortal; Man a Spirit; High Waters; In St. Louis;
  Why Moved to St. Louis; But Few Friends; First Journey in Missouri;
  Wet, Hungry, Out in the Cold; In Troy; In Ashley; Four Brothers;
  In Louisiana; Opposition in London; In Hannibal; Good Friends;
  Questioned in Palmyra About Slavery; Conversation on Judgment;
  In Memphis; Questioned; A Presbyterian Preacher Replied; Was to
  Debate in Newark; Covered with Ice; Missouri River; Discussion in
  Georgetown; In Southern Missouri; Questioned in Warsaw; In Jefferson
  City; Hard Work in Danville; Return to St. Louis.

  CHAPTER XV.

  PAGE 251.

  The Golden Era Issued Semi-Monthly; The Missourians; Slave Holders;
  Travel in Southern Missouri; If Endless Woe is True all Nature would
  Weep; Region of Iron; Dunkards in Millersville; In Southern Illinois;
  Philosophy of Christ Being the Savior of the World; Refuse to Debate;
  Discussion in Carlyle; Inspiration; Our Name; Partialism Approaches
  Infidelity; Three Downward Steps; Reply to a Sermon; Hayne’s Sermon;
  Mr. Lewis Debating on his Knees; Written Discussions with two
  Methodist Ministers; In Northern Missouri; A Preacher Replies; A Log
  Cabin; Talk with a Slave; Thomas Abbott; Negroes Hung; The Golden
  Era; Mrs. Manford Lecturing; Let Woman Work; A Circuit in Missouri;
  Travel in Cold Weather; Debate in Quincy.

  CHAPTER XVI.

  PAGE 277.

  The Golden Era; Extensive Traveling; In Missouri and Kansas; Talk
  with a Deist in Jefferson City; Moses; The Prophets; Replied to
  in Pisgah; Talk with a Rum-seller; In Kansas City; In Wyandotte;
  Conversation with a Clergyman Concerning Christ and his Work;
  Lectured in Leavenworth; Destruction of Man’s Enemies; In St. Joseph;
  The Mercy of God; In Kingston; Rich Man and Lazarus.

  CHAPTER XVII.

  PAGE 293.

  The Rebellion Commenced; What Senator Douglas Said; Defenders of our
  Country; Camp Jackson; Rebel Flag; Great Expectations; Subscribers
  Lost; Money Lost; All but Two of the Religious Journals Stopped;
  Could do but Little in Missouri; Society in St. Louis; G. S. Weaver
  Left; The Unitarian Society; Published Pamphlet on Water Baptism;
  Discussion with B. H. Smith; Extracts from the Discussion.

  CHAPTER XVIII.

  PAGE 315.

  Discussion in Pontiac; The Apostle’s Faith; His Argument in Romans;
  Extensive Traveling; In Kansas and Missouri; Price’s Raid; In
  Ohio and Indiana; Dark Night and Walk in Toledo; Conversation on
  Destructionism; The Victory; The Death; President Lincoln; Debate in
  Milford, Ohio; The Restitution an old Doctrine; The Sentiment Wide
  Spread; At Work in Iowa; Laborers There; Murderers Saved and the
  Murdered Lost; Intellectual and Moral Growth; What Man Was; What He
  is to Be; The Victory; Spiritualism; Immoral Preaching; Saved Without
  Repentance; Preaching a Means of Salvation; A Methodist Minister
  Believes; The Suicide.

  CHAPTER XIX.

  PAGE 346.

  Last Campaign; In Galesburg, Ill.; The United States Convention;
  Lombard University; Other Schools; Journey to Missouri; In Macon
  City; In Brookfield; St. Joseph and Other Cities; Grove Meeting; On
  the Missouri Bottom; Beautiful Country; Preach in Fillmore and many
  other Places; Return Home; Anti-Orthodox Preaching; Funeral Sermons;
  Death; Life; Conclusion.




CHAPTER I.


  PARENTAGE AND CHILDHOOD--LORD TIMOTHY DEXTER--AT SCHOOL--IN
  HAVERHILL--SHOEMAKING--EARLY ASPIRATIONS--CONVERTED--MUST BE A
  MINISTER--ON A PLANK--ATTENDS SCHOOL--A LONG WALK--STUDIES WITH J.
  C. WALDO AND DR. COBB--FIRST PREACHING--WITH W. S. BALCH--FIRST
  TOUR--FIRST DEBATE--COMES OUT SECOND BEST--TALK WITH AN ENGLISHMAN
  ABOUT AMERICAN COARSENESS--CONVERSATION ON SLAVERY--IN MARYLAND--TALK
  WITH AN EPISCOPAL CLERGYMAN CONCERNING ENDLESS WOE NOT BEING TAUGHT
  IN THE OLD TESTAMENT--TRAVELING AND PREACHING ON THE EASTERN
  SHORE--RETURNS TO BALTIMORE--A STORM--WHERE TRUTH FLOURISHES AND
  WHERE IT DOES NOT--ANOTHER LOCATION--SELF AND FAITH ABUSED--PREACHES
  IN HARPERS FERRY, CHARLESTON, WINCHESTER, VA.--A HARD BATTLE--CROSSES
  THE ALLEGHANY MOUNTAINS.

Having been often solicited, by my friends, to publish an account of
my travels and labors in the West, after much hesitation and doubt, I
have concluded to accede to their wishes. But before doing so, I will
say a little about my early life. Newburyport, Mass., is my native
place. My father, whose full name I bear, was from Denmark; my mother
from Amsterdam, Holland. I was the first born of a family of three
boys, one of whom, Frederick, many years since passed the way of all
the earth. The other, James, resides in Texas. My father was a sailor,
and was lost at sea in a terrific storm, when I was seven years old.
I have a faint recollection of seeing him two or three times, and the
only memento I have of him, is a large pitcher he had manufactured in
Liverpool with his name and the picture of a ship on one side, and my
mother’s maiden name and a picture representing Liberty, Peace and
Independence, on the opposite side. My mother was left in indigent
circumstances, with not a relative in the New World, save her three
helpless boys. She married some years after my father’s death, and
resided till her death, which took place two years since, in Princeton,
Mass. I have then a father, mother and one brother on the other side of
the river, and one brother on this side, and not many years can elapse
ere the whole family will be reunited in the land beyond the flood. I
well remember the spot where all of us once lived, although I have not
been in Newburyport for thirty years. It was on High street, between
the Court House and the residence of “Lord” Timothy Dexter. To me,
that street seemed a paradise, and it was, and still is, a magnificent
thoroughfare. It is on high ground, runs parallel with the Merrimac
river, overlooks the harbor, and is bordered with rows of grand
trees, with fine residences embowered in lawns and flower gardens.
In this charming locality, I spent the first decade of my life. Here
I ran, played, and frolicked with my brothers, and other little
associates. The Mall around the Court House, the pond in the rear, and
a neighboring cemetery, were places of frequent resort. On Sunday,
I attended Dr. Morse’s church, where, I am told, I was christened
by the good doctor, who was an Episcopalian. But the bud came near
being suddenly blasted. An old-fashioned cent which I put into my
mouth, slipped down my throat, and was extracted with much difficulty.
I distinctly remember the circumstance. When the copper was taken
out, blood flowed copiously from my mouth. My poor mother was much
frightened, and I suffered for a short time severely. If my father had
lived, I should probably have been a sailor. He was first mate of the
ship in which he made his last and fatal voyage, and was to have been
promoted to captain on his return. I have ever loved the sea, and a
ship is a thing of beauty in my eye. But it was written that the solid
earth, not the treacherous deep, should be the field of my operations.

One word about Lord Timothy, just referred to. He was a very eccentric
man, had many soft spots on his head, but knew enough to accumulate a
large fortune. He built a magnificent residence, which he adorned in a
very extravagant manner, with sculpture and pictures. He was very vain
of his house and wealth. It is said that a stranger, passing his house,
was attentively observing it, when Dexter, who was sitting at a window,
remarked: “Do you not think this is paradise?” “I should,” replied the
man, “if I did not see the devil at the window.” He was dubbed “Lord”
for his vanity and ostentation, and the title delighted him as much as
“Corsica” prefixed to Boswell, delighted the well known biographer of
that name.

I commenced attending school at an early age, but have no pleasant
memories of school-hours in my native town. My teacher would read a
chapter in the Bible, and make a long prayer every morning, and then
whip and pound his pupils till the time for his evening devotions. If
I escaped a day without two or three hard thrashings, I deemed myself
very fortunate, and I think I was as dutiful as school boys generally
were of my age. He was doubtless a believer in total depravity, and was
sure that nothing but blows and knocks would make a good impression on
our corrupt hearts.

From my tenth to my eighteenth year, I resided in Haverhill, Mass.,
with S. George. He was a farmer and shoemaker--made shoes in the
winter, and tilled the soil summers, and I worked on his farm and in
his shop, except winters, when I attended school. I remember my first
attempt at horseback riding. I went to live with him in the spring,
and he soon put me on a horse to ride when ploughing corn. The beast
was contrary and spirited. He would go like jehu a few rods, and then
stop short, and I would go over his head on to the ground. But I was as
spunky as the horse, and would scramble up, and tell Mr. G. to put me
on again. I was always eager to remount the beast, although he threw me
twenty times a day. Since then, I have rode over the Western country
horseback, and consider myself a good horseman.

I have said I worked in Mr. G.’s shoe shop; yes, and learned to make
cheap shoes, but always despised the business, and never more than half
learned the trade. My aspiration was to be a _merchant_. Oh, if I could
only be a merchant how happy I would be! I dreamed, and planned, and
built air-castles--would weep over my “lapstone,” for being doomed to
work at that hateful trade. When I was about sixteen years old, the
Boston _Trumpet_, a Universalist paper, published by Thomas Whittemore,
led me to look into Universalism, for up to that time I knew nothing of
its principles or history. Mr. George’s family, and all my associates,
attended the Congregational church in the neighborhood, and no body
seemed to call in question the infallibility of the sermons we heard
every Sunday. But the _Trumpet_ opened a new world to my view, changed
all my aspirations, and I was really born again. I thought no more of
being a merchant--that seemed a contemptible calling,--but must be a
_preacher_. I devoured the paper, read the Bible, and had many hard
fought battles with my comrades. I loved them, loved the world, and was
sure, if I could get the ears of mankind, I could convert all nations
and people. The world seemed to be a musical instrument, tuning the
praises of its almighty Author. Thomas Farnsworth was then preaching
in Haverhill, four miles from where I resided, and I called on him
several times, and he urged me to prepare for the ministry, but I never
intimated to him that I had such an intention. I kept that to myself.

I was always fond of reading, and my new faith quickened my love
for it. I perused religious books, romance, history, but poetry was
especially my delight. I remember with what enthusiasm I read portions
of Dr. Young’s “Night Thoughts.” His grand and solemn thoughts and
diction stirred my soul to its lowest depths. I even wrote what I
called “poetry,” but I am thankful that none of it survives. I have
never attempted the “divine art” since those early days, although
phrenologists tell me I _ought_ to be something of a poet, as my
“ideality” is large.

When in Haverhill, I came near losing my life. I never could swim,
but with a plank three feet long, one end pressing against my body, I
could paddle far from shore into deep water, without any fear. On one
occasion, when indulging in one of my aqueous excursions, while in deep
water, a comrade, who was ignorant of my helpless condition when off
the plank, took it from me, when down I went, but by the aid of other
boys I reached the shore, and I never went into deep water again on my
frail craft. In my boyhood, I was subject to violent attacks of colic
and sick headache, but otherwise my health was good. My physical frame
was small and of fine texture, and consequently I was not very strong,
and could not cope with boys generally of my age in athletic exercises.

When I was eighteen years old, I left old Haverhill, and repaired to
Princeton, where I attended school one year, and made considerable
progress in English branches. But my purse being nearly empty, I was
obliged to replenish it before I could further prosecute my studies;
and having no one to aid me, I went to Boston, hoping something
would there turn up in my favor. I knew no one in that city, and no
one knew me, and soon became satisfied I had better try my fortune
elsewhere. I noticed in a city paper, that school teachers were wanted
in Eastern New York, and I resolved to go there and seek a school,
although I had only three dollars in my pocket, and it was one hundred
and eighty miles to the place of destination; but my empty purse did
not prevent my making the journey. On foot and alone, I traveled the
whole distance. Although my feet were sore, and my bones and muscles
ached, I pursued my weary march, and finally reached the neighborhood
of Bethlehem--I think that was the name of the place. I found myself
in the midst of a German settlement, with a people of unknown tongue,
and of manners and customs all new to me. I remained there but a few
days, became distressingly homesick, and resolved to return to Boston.
Repaired to Albany, where I sold my watch to pay traveling expenses,
went on a steamboat to New-York city, and from thence to Boston by
sea. This was my first tour; this was the beginning of my ramblings,
but it was rather an unpropitious beginning. When I went on this
school-hunting expedition, my intention was, after securing a school,
to devote my leisure hours to study, and if opportunity offered, to
speak occasionally in public, and thereby prepare myself for what I
deemed the chief business of my life. But that Dutch Bethlehem broke up
all my calculations, and I returned disgusted, but not discouraged.

In a few days I walked out to Lynn, the great shoe manufacturing town
of New England, where nearly all the men, women and children are
shoemakers, and recommenced cobbling, earning enough to defray current
expenses, and continued my studies. J. C. Waldo was then pastor of the
Universalist church in Lynn, and I soon introduced myself to him, and
made known my intentions of preparing for the ministry, and he kindly
offered me the use of his books, and such instruction as I might need
in prosecuting my object. I remained in L. six months, working, reading
and writing, when Mr. Waldo advised me to go to Malden, and study with
Sylvanus Cobb. To Malden I repaired, and made arrangements with Mr. C.
to reside in his family, and devote all my time to study.

A new era in my life had now opened, and my hopes were buoyant. I
could give all my time and thought to study, and I made the best use
of my advantages. Mr. Cobb was a prominent man in the denomination, an
able minister, a fair scholar, and consequently well qualified to give
instruction. To that excellent man, and his accomplished lady, I am
under great and lasting obligations. “I was a stranger and they took
me in.” May God ever bless them. They now reside in Boston. Mr. Cobb,
or rather, Dr. Cobb, for he is now a D. D., for many years published
the _Christian Freeman_, is the author of a Commentary on the New
Testament, and of several other useful books. His son, Sylvanus Cobb,
Jr., who is a well known literary writer, was a boy when I was in Mr.
C.’s family, and the twins, Cyrus and Darius, now ministers, and who
fought for the Stars and Stripes, during the late rebellion, were born
while I was a member of the household. He had three other students
while I was with him--A. P. Cleverly, G. Hastings, and C. S. Hussey. We
had fine times; we talked, read, wrote and declaimed. When we wanted
to ventilate our logic, we repaired to a neighboring grove, where we
made the welkin ring with our eloquence. “The Orthodox,” said A. P.
Cleverly, on one of these occasions, “will come to you with their creed
in one hand, and damnation in the other, and say to you, take _this_
or take _that_, but one of them you must and shall have.” On Monday
we generally went to Boston, two miles distant, and at the _Trumpet_
office would usually see Hosea Ballou, H. Ballou, 2d, Walter Balfour,
Thomas Whittemore, Sabastian Streeter, Henry Bacon, T. B. Thayer, all
noted men, but most of them are now dwellers of the spirit land. The
departed did a noble work on earth, and long will they be remembered.
“Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.”

When I had been with Mr. Cobb about three months, he went to the state
of Maine, and left me to preach for him one Sabbath. My heart jumped
when the first bell on Sunday morning told me to prepare for my first
pulpit services; but I went through the exercises of the day without
much embarrassment. My texts were: “God is love”--“They hated me
without a cause.” When Mr. C. returned, he seemed well satisfied with
my effort, for he had heard his friends speak of it, and gave me words
of encouragement. While with him, I preached in Lynn, Haverhill, and
several other places, but devoted most of my time to hard study.

After being with Mr. Cobb six months, I put myself under the
instruction of William S. Balch, then residing in Claremont, N. H., and
pastor of the church in that place. I found him to be a noble man and
shall ever remember his many acts of kindness with gratitude. Although
I was in his family, and received his instruction most of the time
during six months, he would receive no compensation. He now resides
in Galesburg, Ill., and although years are pressing hard upon him, he
is as faithful in the discharge of his ministerial duties as when in
early manhood. When with him, I took my _first preaching tour_, and had
my _first debate_. I went up the Connecticut river into Canada, and
preached in most of the towns on both sides of the river. I performed
the journey on foot, and must have walked about two hundred miles. In
one town where I had an appointment, a Methodist minister had one at
the same place and hour. We both met in the pulpit. He did not wish to
speak, as he was unwell, he said, and desired me to occupy the time. I
objected, for I was afraid of him; but as he insisted that I should go
ahead, I delivered my discourse. My text was: “For if the word spoken
by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect
so great a salvation which at the first was spoken by the Lord, and
confirmed unto us by them that heard him.” Heb. ii. 2, 3. As soon as
I was through, he seemed to be well enough, took my text, and made a
long reply to my feeble effort. He handled me rather rough, but I did
the best I could in the way of a rejoinder, but felt that I had come
out _second_ best. It was not manly in him, an experienced preacher,
to attack a boy as he did; but I suppose he had rather encounter a boy
than a man.

Soon after returning from this journey, I noticed a statement by Otis
A. Skinner, a minister in Baltimore, Md., in one of our denominational
papers, that several young men were wanted to preach in Maryland, and
Mr. Balch advised me to go there. Heeding his advice, I went by stage
across the Green Mountains to Albany, thence to New-York. In the latter
place, I had the following conversation with an Englishman, right from
his foggy island:

“I do not like this country,” said he.

“Why not?” I inquired.

“I have many reasons. One is, the people are not refined enough. I did
not encounter as much coarseness during the thirty years I lived in
England, as I have in this country the past six months.”

“You have been very unfortunate in the company you have kept. There are
coarse people in all countries, and a man can eat and sleep with them
all his lifetime if he chooses. But that there are more coarse people
in this country than in England, I am sure is an error. But what do you
mean by coarseness?”

“I mean that the _peasants_ do not pay proper respect to _gentlemen_.”

“Yes, yes; I understand you. Why, sir, we have no _peasants_ in this
country; _all are gentlemen_.”

“I abhor such a democratic notion. Only see how rudely your people talk
about the President of the United States. He is called Mr. Jackson, Old
Jackson, Old Hickory. In Europe, we call the king, His Majesty. Don’t
you see the difference?”

“I see the difference. The people of this country have little respect
for titles, and I am thankful for it; but they have great respect for
_man_; so much that they deem every man a sovereign; and I hope they
will never make such fools of themselves as to single out one of their
number, perhaps the biggest gump in the land, and bow down and worship
him, and like cringing slaves, call him ‘His Majesty.’ God only is
worthy the title of Majesty.”

In the cars near Baltimore, I had some conversation with a lawyer,
concerning slavery.

“Are you going South?” he inquired.

“To Maryland. Am from the East, and was never as far south or west
before.”

“As you are going into a slave-holding state, I should like to know
your views of slavery.”

“In principle I think it is wrong; but I know little of its practical
effects. I shall be better able to judge of it practically at some
future time.”

“Morally I regard it wrong; nearly all the Southern people so view it.
But that slavery is a benefit to the blacks, there can be no doubt. As
an evidence of this, contrast the condition of the negroes in Africa
with their condition in the Southern states. In this country they are
far better off than their brethren are in Africa.”

“They doubtless are in some respects, but I am not sure that slavery
has improved them. Living in this country, and associating, to some
extent, with a superior race, has improved them; but I cannot admit
that slavery has done it. You admit slavery to be an evil, and we have
the best authority for asserting, that an evil tree cannot produce good
fruit. It seems to me that you condemn slavery in _principle_ and
_practice_ when you admit it to be an evil. What effect do you think it
has on the whites?”

“Decidedly a beneficial effect. There is more refinement and high-toned
character in the slave states than in the free states. The people in
the South have leisure to cultivate the better sentiments of their
nature.”

“I repeat, you must be mistaken. If slavery is a upas tree--is an evil
as you admit--it cannot produce such heavenly fruit. It is not true
that the Southern people are more intelligent, moral and refined than
the Eastern people. Statistics, from which there can be no appeal, show
that there are more school houses, academies, colleges and meeting
houses in the East, than in the South, in proportion to the population.
There are more persons in Virginia, the best of the slave states, who
cannot read or write, than there are in six of the most Eastern states.
Facts are against you.”

I proceeded to Baltimore, and S. P. Skinner, who afterwards resided,
preached and published the _New Covenant_, in Chicago, advised me to go
to the eastern shore of Maryland. This portion of the state, and part
of Delaware, lies between the Chesapeake and Delaware bays. Most of
this neck of land is level and sandy, having been, at a comparatively
recent period, reclaimed from the sea. Went in a small vessel to
Centerville. While running down, I had some conversation, on religious
subjects, with an Episcopal clergyman.

“The doctrine of endless punishment is taught in the Old Testament.”

“That is your opinion, but some of the wisest and most learned men
of your school differ from you. I will read some extracts from their
writings on this subject. Your Bishop Warburton, in his Divine Legation
of Moses, says:--‘In the Jewish Republic, both the rewards and
punishments promised by heaven were temporal only. Such as health, long
life, peace, plenty, and dominion, etc. Disease, premature death, war,
famine, want, subjections, and captivity, etc. And in no one place in
the Mosaic Institutes is there the least mention, or any intelligible
hint, of the rewards and punishments of another life.’

“Milman, in his History of the Jews, testifies thus:--‘The sanction on
which the Hebrew Law was founded is extraordinary. The lawgiver (Moses)
maintains a profound silence on that fundamental article, if not of
political, at least of religious legislation--rewards and punishments
in another life. He substituted temporal chastisements and temporal
blessings. On the violation of the constitution followed inevitably
blighted harvests, famine, pestilence, defeat, captivity; on its
maintenance, abundance, health, fruitfulness, victory, independence.
How wonderfully the event verified the prediction of the inspired
legislator! how invariably apostasy led to adversity--repentance and
reformation to prosperity!’

“Dr. Paley, another great man of your church, admits the same:--‘This
(Mosaic) dispensation dealt in temporal rewards and punishments. In
the 28th of Deuteronomy you find Moses, with prodigious solemnity,
pronouncing the blessings and cursings which awaited the children
of Israel under the dispensation to which they were called. And you
will observe, that these blessings consisted _altogether_ of worldly
benefits, and these curses of worldly punishments.’

“Jahn, the best of authority says:--‘We have not authority, therefore,
decidedly to say, that any other motives were held out to the ancient
Hebrews to pursue good and avoid evil, than those which were derived
from the rewards and punishments of this life.’

“This is the testimony of able and learned men who have made the Bible
their life-study. Notwithstanding they believed in eternal woe, they
candidly admit that it is not taught by the great Lawgiver, Moses, or
the prophets.”

“They do seem to think that doctrine is not taught in the Old
Testament, and I admit their judgment is entitled to much respect. I
will look into the subject.”

“I am glad to hear you express such a purpose. And I am sure that you
will agree with those wise men, after a careful examination. If they
are correct, and the dogma in question is true, is it not amusing
that the Old Testament writers say nothing about it? If they had
believed in eternal punishment, they surely would have spoken of it
in distinct terms, and warned their countrymen of their danger. You
believe in ceaseless woe, and you preach it faithfully, earnestly. You
are right; you act according to your convictions. And were Moses and
the prophets less faithful and earnest? But they did not speak of it,
and the inference is, they had no faith in the doctrine. But, sir, if
that dogma is true, would not God have _forced_ those inspired men to
proclaim it to a dying world? Would God have permitted the Jews to be
ignorant of so important a matter? What! thousands of immortal spirits
daily dropping into a fiery gulf, and not a word of warning given?
have no intimation of such a place till they find themselves in its
fathomless vortex? Believe this who can, I cannot.”

I spent six months in this part of Maryland, traveling and preaching
all the time. My head-quarters were at Salisbury, and from thence I
went east, west, north and south, sometimes on foot, and sometimes on
horseback. The liberal faith I advocated was almost totally unknown
in that region. O. A. Skinner, who had resided in Baltimore, once
traveled through there, and delivered a few discourses, but I found not
more than a dozen persons, who knew or cared any thing about liberal
christian sentiments. It was any thing but a favorable field for
one so young and inexperienced as I was, to operate in. I was tired
of traveling, and desired to settle where I could devote my time to
two or three places, that I might have an opportunity to study, for
I well knew my literary needs, and as such arrangements could not be
effected in that region, I resolved to try some other locality. That
my well intended labors had much effect, is more than I can affirm,
as I have heard but little of the religious sentiments of the people
since I left there. Much of the Eastern Shore is a very poor country,
and were it not for the fish and oysters that abound in Chesapeake bay,
part of that region would be an uninhabited desert, at least, till the
soil was improved, for the farmers in those days merely scratched over
the ground, and exhausted it more and more every year. Slave labor
and _scratch culture_, I have observed, generally go together. And,
I think it is a fact, that poor soil, unless there are counteracting
causes, such as commerce and manufacturing, produces weak heads and
sterile hearts; and it is also a fact, that the rich sentiments of our
faith will not flourish permanently in physical or moral deserts. The
apostles of our Lord spread the gospel among the ignorant and brutal
nations of the earth, but how soon was it corrupted. Their “darkness
comprehended it not,” and there was soon developed a wretched compound
of light and darkness, error and truth, sin and virtue, life and death,
heaven and hell, and this compound corresponded with the intellectual
and moral culture of the people. Since Luther’s day, the process of
disintegration has been going on, and it will, I trust, continue till
the dross shall be all separated from the gold, and the former burned
with unquenchable fire.

I returned to Baltimore in December, 1836. Encountered a terrific storm
on the Bay, which came near sending the vessel and all on board to the
bottom. It raged during a bitter cold night, the wind was directly
ahead, and most every wave swept the deck fore and aft. The owner was
on board, the steersman was his negro slave, and he stood to his post
like a man the whole of that boisterous and cold night. In the morning
we anchored in a sheltered situation, and during the day reached
Baltimore. Spent several weeks traveling and preaching in the vicinity
of the city, and from thence went to Hagerstown, Md., which I made my
home for six months. Samuel A. Davis had labored in the vicinity some
time previous, as a missionary, but receiving little encouragement, had
moved to Pittsburg, Pa. I preached in Hagerstown, Woodville, Frederick,
Sharpsburg, and many other places, in many of which I was the first to
proclaim our beautiful faith, and encountered all sorts of opposition.
Our ministers who have always labored where our cause is well
established, have no idea of the mean and contemptible opposition a
laborer encounters in a new field, where hardly any one knows any thing
of our faith or its history. At the close of a sermon I delivered in
Frederick, a clergyman of the place, arose and poured forth the vials
of his wrath. He said Universalism was the lowest grade of infidelity,
that the blasphemies of Tom Paine were purity itself compared to it;
and that Universalists were the scum of society, that the grog-shops,
gambling dens, jails and penitentiaries were full of them. Hosea Ballou
and Walter Balfour died drunkards, and they were the best men the sect
ever had. The fellow overshot the mark, and disgusted the people with
himself; and the mild remarks I made after he got through, turned the
tide in my favor. Ever after, I had large congregations in Frederick.

I spoke several times in Charleston, Va., where John Brown was hung;
also in Harper’s Ferry, the place he so easily captured, and in
Winchester, where several battles, during the late rebellion, were
fought. In Smithfield, Va., I had an exciting season. Went there an
entire stranger, and delivered a discourse in a school-house, the first
sermon on the great salvation ever delivered in the place. As soon as
I said amen, up jumped three men to reply. It was with difficulty they
agreed on which should first speak. They finally settled that matter,
and then gave me particular attention. Each of them occupied about half
an hour, and as the night was short, for it was an evening meeting, it
was midnight when they got through. I notified the people that I would
notice the arguments of the speakers the next evening. The novelty of
my faith, and the attention I received from three of the most prominent
men of the town, caused intense excitement, and the whole village, and
the region round about, attended the next meeting. My three opponents,
one doctor and two lawyers, were on hand, with paper and pencil, which
was ominous of another attack. I noticed the arguments and proofs of
the gentlemen, and replied to them in the best way I could. One of them
had charged me with denying a judgment day. I stated that I believed
in a judgment day, yea, in many judgment days. The Bible speaks of
numerous judgment days, but they are all _this side_ of the end of
the world. When Adam and Eve were condemned and driven out of Eden’s
bowers, it was a judgment day to them. When Cain was banished to the
land of Nod, it was his judgment day. When the wrath of heaven burst
on the world and destroyed all but Noah’s family, it was a terrible
judgment day. The Sodomites experienced the horrors of a judgment day
when they were destroyed by fire. The ten tribes of Israel, when they
were banished to the far East, never to return, knew something of a day
of judgment. When Babylon, Nineveh, and other mighty cities of the old
world were destroyed, they suffered the desolations of judgment days.
When Jerusalem was trodden under foot by the Babylonian power, and when
subsequently it was burned up, ploughed up, and drenched with the blood
of its citizens, did it not suffer, what the sacred writers call, days
of darkness, of gloom, of judgment? The world has been crowded with
judgment days: all nations and people have sadly experienced their
sorrows. The Christian dispensation is also termed a day of judgment.
It commenced when the kingdom of God was established on earth by the
Son of the Highest, and will continue, till Jesus shall return the
kingdom to God the Father, as recorded in 1st Corinthians 15th chapter,
when God shall be _all in all_. It commenced amid sin, error, suffering
and death, and when it shall end those evils will be known no more,
but truth, virtue, life and immortality will be the universal and
everlasting boon of Adam’s race.

As soon as I got through, a lawyer commenced reading a long chapter of
quotations from the Bible, to prove that there was a _devil_. He had
prepared it with much care, and read it loud and emphatically. It was
supposed that a preacher or two in town helped him to his texts, and
comments. When he closed, a doctor commenced an harangue, but I begged
him to hold on till I had disposed of his brother’s sermon. I told the
people that I believed in _many devils_--lying, slanderous, revengeful,
cruel, superstitious, sectarian devils; that every man was his own
devil, and if any of my hearers should become vile and degraded, if
they would look into a mirror, they would see a devil. But I had no
faith in the devil the lawyer had been preaching about. As soon as I
had finished my remarks, the doctor resumed his speech. He launched
into the parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, and did a large amount of
special pleading, to show that the hell spoken of in that passage was
a place of eternal woe. When he was through, I asked him if he would
answer a few questions. He replied that he would.

“Do you regard that passage to be a literal relation of _facts_?”

“I do.”

“Hell is there called a _place_. Do you suppose it is a place having
length, width and height?”

“Yes.”

“It is said to contain _fire_. Do you believe it contains fire?”

“I do, for the passage says so.”

“The rich man and Lazarus were within _speaking distance_ of each
other--they talked together. Do you think that heaven and hell are so
near each other, that the saved can see the damned, and hear their
groans and lamentations?”

“I am not bound to answer that question.”

“But you promised to answer my questions.”

Several voices--“You must answer”--“You are getting into a tight place.”

“Well, if I must answer it, I will say, Yes.”

“One more question. Could you be happy in heaven if you should see all
the dear ones you now love, roasting in hell? Will you answer?”

“To be candid, I do not see how I could be happy.”

“I thank you for your candor. According to your interpretation of the
passage, and it is the common interpretation, heaven and hell, the
latter a region of quenchless fire, are _neighbors_, within _speaking
distance of each other_, and mankind are to be torn asunder--part
driven into hell, and part sent to heaven--husbands and wives divided,
parents and children, brothers and sisters divided, part in heaven and
part in hell, and those in heaven will know that half of the world
are in hell, that their near and dear friends are there. Now, it is
utterly impossible for there to be any happiness in heaven, when such
a world of woe is within sight and hearing. The passage must be a
parable--figurative language. Jesus often spake in parables. It is in
connection with several parables, and like them is figurative. But
I have not time this evening to give an explanation of it, but on
to-morrow, Sunday, at eleven o’clock, will give what I regard to be the
true exposition of that important passage.”

The discussion had a sensible effect on the hearers; some rejoiced and
some were mad. One old gentleman, with streaming eyes, thanked me for
what he had heard. But others were so enraged, that some of my friends
feared that violent hands would be laid on me, ere I should reach the
hotel, and I heard several cry, “Search his saddle-bags! he is a d----d
abolitionist! get a rail!”

The next day my meeting was in a grove, for no house, that could be
obtained, would hold half of the people who came out. My youth, the
novelty of my faith, and the controversy, drew an immense concourse.
The people listened with attention and respect, and the meeting was not
disturbed by any opposition. I went to the village a stranger to all,
but when I left, which was the next day, I had many friends.

I often preached in Harpers Ferry, and generally had large
congregations. The town site, and its surroundings, are well known to
be remarkably picturesque. The Shenandoah and Potomac, rapid streams,
here unite, and roar and plunge through the chasm they have made
through the Blue Ridge. The rocks on both sides are several hundred
feet high, and nearly perpendicular. Thomas Jefferson said it was worth
a voyage across the Atlantic to see this wonderful work of nature.

Near Hagerstown, I had a little controversy with a Campbellite
preacher. We both had an appointment in a _barn_, and the people were
eager to hear both of us speak. He delivered a discourse on his
peculiar views--dwelt long on the importance of water baptism, which
he affirmed was a condition of salvation. In my discourse, I paid
particular attention to his water-cure notions, and showed that if he
was correct, none could be saved without being baptized in water, and
therefore most of mankind would be lost forever, as but a small portion
of our race are immersed. In his reply he said he did not believe in
endless misery, but in _annihilation_, and admitted that he had no
evidence of the salvation of a soul, old or young, in a christian or a
heathen land, without water baptism. What a gospel! I rejoined. Instead
of bringing life and immortality to light, it proclaims _eternal death_
to nearly the whole world; instead of being good news to our race, it
is a howl of everlasting despair; instead of being a blessing to the
world, it is an unmitigated curse; instead of its proclaiming that
God is the loving Father of mankind, it announces that He is full
of partiality and hatred towards most of His creatures. Never again
prostitute that blessed word, gospel, by calling your partial, cruel
and revengeful system by that dear name. There is not as much gospel in
your creed as there is brain in a mosquito’s head.

One evening, I accompanied a friend to a Methodist meeting; the
congregation was large, and a “revival” was raging in its midst. The
first speaker spoke well and sensibly, but his words fell on dull ears
and cold hearts. The second speaker was a regular son of thunder, and
he did thunder, and storm, and quake, and he made some of his hearers
do the same. When he got through with his “exhortation,” he kneeled
and said, “Let us pray.” He prayed, and half of the assembly prayed
with him. He raised his voice, and they raised theirs; he screamed
like a maniac, and they did the same; he jumped up and down, and they
jumped up and down. I looked on with utter amazement, having never
witnessed such a scene before. As soon as he had finished this part of
the performance, he told all to rise to their feet, who wanted to go to
heaven. I was the only one who did not stand up. “Rise to your feet,”
said he, “or you will be damned.” I kept my seat, and though strongly
tempted to rebuke him, I said nothing.

Near Charleston, Va., I attended, for the first time, a Methodist
camp-meeting, and have not since been anxious to renew my acquaintance
with such gatherings. It was held in a beautiful grove, and there were
present some two thousand people, black and white. During the services,
the whites were seated in front of the speaker’s stand, and the negroes
in its rear. The speakers would talk awhile to their white brethren,
and then turn on their heels and give the black brethren a broadside,
and the latter always responded to the condescension of the preachers
with a hearty shout. The night was the hour of promise; then they were
almost sure of being blessed with copious showers of “grace.” Sunlight,
it seems, is not favorable to its descent; it comes more plentifully
with moonshine. The night I was on the ground, there were all sorts of
manifestations of the “spirit.” Some laughed, others cried, groaned,
and threw themselves on the ground. I noticed one poor fellow trying
to climb a tree, and I asked him where he was going. “To heaven,” said
he, and he kept scratching the tree with his finger and toe nails, for
he was bare-footed. The preachers and the hearers generally, seemed to
think all that hopping, jumping, shouting and screaming, was the work
of God in converting the souls of the people. Every good thing can be
abused, and thus become an evil. Religious excitement, when kept within
due bounds, is productive of much good, but when it overleaps all
bounds, and becomes temporary insanity, as it did on this occasion,
it is prostituted to a very bad purpose. I spent a short time in the
“preacher’s tent” where the following conversation ensued:

“John Wesley was opposed to such excitement as you have here.”

“You are mistaken,” replied the Presiding Elder; “that man of God was
in favor of it, for he knew it was the work of the spirit of God, and I
warn you to flee from the wrath to come, before it shall be eternally
too late.”

“Do not get excited, my friend. Let us see what Wesley says about what
you call the work of the Holy Spirit. In one of his volumes he speaks
of the doings of Satan thus:--‘Satan strives to push many of them to
extravagance. This appears in several instances:

“‘1. Frequently three or four, yea, ten or twelve, pray aloud together.

“‘2. Some of them, perhaps, may scream altogether, as loud as they can.

“‘3. Some of them use improper, yea, indecent expression in prayer.

“‘Several drop down as dead, and are as stiff as a corpse; but in a
while they start up and cry, “glory, glory!” perhaps twenty times
together. Just so do the French prophets, and very lately the Jumpers
in Wales, bringing the real work into contempt.

“‘Scream no more at the peril of your soul. God now warns you by me. I
never scream, I never strain myself; I dare not, I know it would be a
sin against God and my own soul!

“‘Some very unstill sisters, who always took care to stand near me,
and tried who could cry loudest, since I have had them removed out
of my sight, they have been as quiet as lambs. The first night I
preached here, one half of my words were lost through the noise of
their outcries; last night, before I began, I gave public notice that
whosoever cried as to drown my voice, should, without man’s hurting or
judging them, be gently carried to the farthest corner of the room, but
my porters had no employment the whole night.

“‘There is a fervor which has passed for devotion, but it is not true,
not scriptural devotion. It is loud shouting, horrid, unnatural
screaming, repeating the same words twenty or thirty times, jumping
two or three feet high, throwing about the arms and legs, both men and
women, in a manner shocking not only to religion, but to common decency.

“‘I dislike,

“‘1. Speaking or praying of several at once.

“‘2. Praying to the Son of God only, or more than to the Father.

“‘3. The use of improper expressions in prayer.

“‘4. The using poor, flat, bald hymns.

“‘5. Those never kneeling in prayer. (They sat on the floor.)

“‘6. Your using postures or gestures highly indecent.

“‘7. Your screaming, so as to make the words unintelligible.

“‘8. Your affirming people will be justified or sanctified just now.

“‘9. The affirming they are where they are not.

“‘10. The bidding them, “I believe.”

“‘11. The bitterly condemning any that oppose, calling them wolves,
etc., and pronouncing them hypocrites, or not justified!’

“These are Wesley’s words, and you have been doing here nearly all he
so severely rebukes. What you call the work of God, he calls the work
of Satan.”

“Let us pray,” said the Elder, with an awful groan. And such a prayer!
It was not praying, but rather the ravings of a mad man, and the crowd
raved with him. He called me the devil, and said I had slandered
the sainted Wesley, and had come there to stop the work of God. He
beseeched the Lord, either to convert my soul or send me to hell. When
he was through, I told him that his performance was more like the
ravings of a maniac, than the simple prayer of a Christian, and bid him
good by.

After spending six months in this region, traveling and preaching
constantly, and seeing but slim prospect for establishing our cause
permanently there, and receiving hardly any compensation for all
my hard labor, and many privations, I resolved to go to Pittsburg,
Pa. The truth is, I was much discouraged. I had labored one year in
Maryland, and found but few sympathizers with me or my faith, and had
not received fifty dollars for all my toil. I was tired of traveling,
and longed for an abiding place where I could preach without being
constantly on the wing, and where I could pursue my studies. I was not
avaricious, but thought, as I devoted all my time to the ministry,
I ought to be comfortably supported. I regretted having come to the
state, and certainly should not have been there, had I known the
religious character of the people, and how few friends we had in that
region.




CHAPTER II.


  IN PITTSBURG--S. A. DAVIS, WIFE AND DAUGHTER--THE WEST--PREACHES
  IN PENNSYLVANIA AND OHIO--WESTERN RESERVE--TALK WITH A
  BIGOT--CONVERSATION ON A STEAMBOAT--FORBIDDEN TO PREACH--GRAVE
  CREEK--A MOUND--MY STUDY--WHAT IS SALVATION?--PROCEEDINGS IN
  BAINBRIDGE--MUD--IN CINCINNATI--GENERAL HARRISON--IN RISING SUN,
  PATRIOT--PREACHES IN LOUISVILLE, KY.--E. M. PINGREE--ON THE
  MISSISSIPPI RIVER--PREACHES IN A STEAMBOAT--IN NEW ORLEANS--BATTLE
  GROUND.

I went to Pittsburg by stage, stopped at several places on the road,
and delivered my message. Arriving in that city, I became acquainted
with S. A. Davis, pastor of the church there, and publisher of the
_Glad Tidings_, a paper devoted to the good cause. His church was
numerically feeble, for liberal principles had just begun to take root
in that city as in the West generally. Mr. Davis worked hard in the
double capacity of pastor and editor. He was a pleasant speaker, fair
writer, and a very excellent man. His wife, who long since went to the
better world, possessed much talent, and wrote clever articles for
the _Glad Tidings_. He now resides in the East, and is still in the
Master’s service. His daughter, Minnie Davis, is one of the best female
writers in the denomination. She has written several excellent books,
and contributes liberally to our periodical literature.

I had crossed the mountain barrier between the East and the West, and
was then in the Mississippi Valley--merely though on its border. Its
hills and vales, its forests and prairies, its rivers and lakes, were
all before me towards the setting sun. Compare the West _then_ to the
West _now_. Never since earth’s foundation was laid, has any country
exhibited such rapid progress in so few years. The West has made a
thousand years growth in twenty-five years. And is it destined to
continue to grow at that rate? The signs of the times indicate that it
is even so. The most vivid imagination can form but a faint conception
of the future greatness of the West. Columbus, romantic and extravagant
as were his visions, could not have dreamed of half the glory of the
future West. Here fiction has already become fact, and dreams realities.

I effected arrangements to travel and preach in Pennsylvania and Ohio,
for I soon learned that our friends were few in the West, and that I
should have to travel extensively. I submitted to my fate and went
to work. Visited several places in Pennsylvania, but meeting with
little encouragement, I passed into Ohio, where I found more friends.
Preached in many places in the Western Reserve, generally had large
congregations, and found many devoted believers in the Great Salvation.
A large portion of the population of the Reserve were from the Eastern
states, and they brought industrious habits, correct moral principles,
and liberal religious sentiments with them--the right kind of soil for
Universalism to grow in. But where wheat grows, there grows chaff, and
I encountered some intolerable bigotry in that region. In Ashtabula a
vinegar-faced gentleman accosted me thus:

“I understand you are a Universalist preacher.”

“You have been correctly informed. Universalism is only another name
for the gospel. ‘A rose,’ you know, ‘by any other name would smell as
sweet.’”

“Sweet! Universalism the gospel! It is neither sweet nor the gospel.
It is a loathsome spawn from hell, the meanest of all the devil’s mean
works, and you ought not to be allowed to teach it to immortal souls.
I would put a stop to such preaching had I the power.”

“Very likely you would, for you look like a villain. The mark of the
beast is on you, and you would, doubtless, like to be about your
master’s business. The world has been cursed a long time with the
spirit you possess, and with men of your character, and that spirit,
and that breed are not yet dead. Bigots and hypocrites like you, nailed
the Savior of man to the cross, stoned Stephen, murdered the apostles,
and crucified, burnt, hung, beheaded, and quartered, the saints of God
in all ages.”

“If I believed as you do, I would take my fill of sin.”

“You are full of sin _now_.”

“What do you preach for?”

“To reform such men as _you_. You may think you are a Christian of the
first water, but you know nothing about Christianity. The name of its
Author is Love, and Christianity corresponds, letter and spirit, with
that blessed word. But what do you know about _love_? and what does
your fiery creed know about _love_? But you know what _hate_ means,
and you would pursue all with fire and sword who do not kneel at
your shrine. I pray God that you may be converted, that you may know
the meaning of love, mercy, goodness, justice, know that they do not
signify hatred, cruelty, vengeance, and that God is served when we obey
the law of love, not when we hate and devour each other.”

On board of a steamboat, on the Ohio river, I participated in the
following conversation:

“I am free to acknowledge, that I cannot reconcile endless misery with
the goodness of God, and yet I have to believe in that doctrine.”

“Others have admitted the same. The celebrated Dr. Samuel Johnson,
the great moralist of the last century, admitted that God cannot be
infinitely good to the victims of ceaseless woe--so Boswell tells us.
We judge of a person’s character by his works. If his works are evil,
we infer his character is evil; if his works are good, we infer that
his character is good. We are safe in judging of God’s character by the
same criterion. If he has built an everlasting hell, and will consign
his own offspring to its dismal vaults, to be the victims of Almighty
wrath, world without end, and all for the errors of a day, it is
utterly impossible for Him to be _good_, much less, _infinitely_ good.
Goodness seeks the _welfare_, not the _ruin_, of the subjects of its
power.”

“But your argument, if it is sound, proves, that God is not infinitely
good, for the world is full of misery. All, the old and the young, the
good and the bad, suffer.”

“True, there is much suffering beneath the sun, but I think it can be
reconciled with the goodness of the Creator. Consider, first, how short
is our stay on earth. Some are here a few hours, others a few days,
and none but a few years. Suppose there were nothing in this world but
suffering, but if an eternity of bliss awaits us on the other side of
the river, all the sufferings of earth would afford no evidence that
God is not good. For every tear, every sigh, every woe, we should have
millions of ages of happiness. But with very few exceptions, if there
are any, all in this world, enjoy far more than they suffer. There are
more muscles in the face for laughing than for weeping, which proves
that it is the will of our Creator that there should be more happiness
in our cup than sorrow. As there is more sunshine than storm, so more
joy than grief falls to the lot of mortals. But this should also be
considered, most of the suffering men endure, they bring on themselves
by their ignorance or willfulness. This is a beautiful world, a garden
of Eden, and if we observe the laws of the Creator, taste not of the
forbidden fruit, but partake only of fruit from the tree of life,
there would be but little suffering in this world.”

“But we are informed, that man was forbidden to partake of the tree of
life.”

“Adam and Eve were forbidden while they were unrepentant and sinful,
and so are all while they possess such a character. We cannot serve God
and Baal. If we serve the one we despise the other. We cannot possess a
sinful character, and a virtuous character, cannot partake of the tree
of evil and of good at the same time. We are driven from the one when
we partake of the other. But if we flee from the deadly shades of the
upas, touch not, taste not, handle not its poisonous fruit, the tree of
life will be accessible to us. We are told that the leaves of the tree
are for the healing of the nations, (Rev. xxii. 2,) showing, that it is
now within our reach. Yes, if we approach it with pure motives, clean
hands, and reverent steps, we can, even now, pluck its fruit and live.
But a flaming sword prevents access to it while we are morally low,
debased, groveling.”

“That is a new view of the subject; I will think about it.”

“As all suffering in this world is of short duration, and as we
voluntary bring most we do suffer on ourselves, and as we have reason
to trust it will all, by our Heavenly Father, be overruled for good,
and be succeeded by an eternity of blessedness, I cannot see that the
few tears, and aches of this brief life militate against the goodness
of the Creator. I am sure, when we shall have passed through the
strifes and conflicts of this world, and can see the past in the light
of their results, in the light of eternity, we will exclaim, ‘Love
and mercy pursued us all the days of our lives.’ But misery without
mitigation or end, without one ray of hope, nothing but an eternity
of gloom, and the most intense agony, can never be reconciled with
infinite goodness.”

A few miles below Pittsburg, in Virginia--I now forget the name of the
place--I stopped one Saturday evening, and told the people I would
speak to them the next day, if they would give me a hearing. A citizen
invited me to his house, and I delivered a discourse on Sunday morning,
to a large assembly. In the middle of the afternoon, some ten or a
dozen persons entered the house where I was stopping, and after being
seated, the following ensued:

“Are you the man who preached in the school house this morning?”

“Yes.”

“Well, we have called to let you know that you must not hold another
meeting in this town.”

“Why not? What is the matter, gentlemen?”

“Your doctrine is dangerous; it is infidelity, and we want no more of
it.”

“Did any of you hear my discourse to-day?”

“No, and we don’t want to hear such stuff.”

“How then do you know it is dangerous and infidel?”

“We are not here to have a controversy with you, but to notify you that
you cannot occupy the school house this evening.”

My host here informed the gentlemen, that he had an interest in
that house, and that I _should_ preach in it if I desired to. “This
gentleman,” said he, “is a stranger in this place; I heard his sermon
in the morning, and although I know nothing about Universalism, he
uttered not a word I consider dangerous or infidel.”

“When you reflect,” I remarked, “on the mean business you are here
on, you will be heartily ashamed of yourselves, and your conduct.
You admit you did not hear me, and yet you are loud and angry in
your condemnation. I am a stranger in this place, and to you; I have
never harmed a hair of your heads, and yet you treat me with savage
rudeness. Is this Virginia hospitality? What do you suppose I teach?”

“We understand you teach, that there is no God, no Savior, no hell, and
that the good and the bad, go to heaven together.”

“You have been misinformed. My advice to you is, to acquaint yourselves
with the principles you so rudely condemn, for you are as ignorant of
them as the Hottentots are of English grammar.”

“We have no more to say to you, except to repeat, that you must not
again preach your abominations in this town.”

“I expect to hold a meeting in town this evening, and hope you will
attend, and learn something of the gospel of Jesus.”

Exit the inquisitors.

I held a meeting according to appointment, but that company of bigots
kept out of the way. They found, however, they could neither rule me or
the town, for I had a much larger congregation after their visit than
before. Lectured in Wellsville, and a Methodist minister replied in a
good natured manner, and we parted in friendship. Proceeded down the
Ohio river to Wheeling, where I lectured several times, in a Baptist
meeting-house, and then went to Graves Creek, on the Virginia side of
the river, and there spent two weeks, speaking most every day in town
or country. C. G. Cox resided there, and preached occasionally. My
sojourn in this place is a green spot in my memory, for I found some
excellent friends, which was really cheering after meeting with so much
opposition.

There is an artificial mound here, some eighty feet high, of a conic
shape, and very steep. When, or by whom it was made, whether by the
Indians, or a race who preceded them, is unknown, and the mystery
will probably never be solved. A few years since a shaft was extended
through the base of the mound, and a broken arch and some human bones
were found in the center, indicating that it was a monumental structure.

A great portion of my traveling at this period was on foot. I often
walked twenty or twenty-five miles in a day, and delivered a long
discourse at night. Traveling in this hard way, and preaching most
every day, I had but little time to read or write. When a traveler
asked Wordsworth’s servant, to show him his master’s study, he
answered, “Here is his library, but his study is out of doors.”
So, like him, my study was out of doors. The Bible was my constant
companion, and the portions of it that most interested me, were the New
Testament, the Psalms, the book of Job, the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes.
When weary, I would sit by the wayside, and study the Book of Life,
and on resuming my march, would reflect on what I had read, or arrange
a sermon. My discourses were seldom written, neither were they wholly
extemporaneous, for I often repeated portions of them.

I journeyed to Steubenville, Ohio, where I spoke twice; then to
Marietta, and from thence to Chillicothe, as I was then bound for
Cincinnati. In Chillicothe, I remained a week, and lectured four
times. While in this place, I had the following conversation with a
Presbyterian clergyman:

“What do you mean by salvation?”

“I mean, deliverance from evil tendencies, thoughts, habits, purposes,
and all of their long train of results. This is a _perfect_ salvation.
It can be only partially enjoyed in this world, at best; it will
require the grace, light and wisdom of eternity to perfect the work.
It may be commenced here, but cannot be consummated in this lower
world. And this is what the New Testament means by salvation. ‘Thou
shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
_sins_.’ Matt. i. 21. ‘Behold the Lamb of God, who taketh away the
_sin_ of the world.’ John i. 28. ‘Unto you first, God having raised
up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you
from his _iniquities_.’ Acts iii. 25. ‘There shall come out of Zion
the deliverer, who shall turn away _ungodliness_ from Jacob; for this
is the covenant unto them, when I shall take away their _sins_.’ Rom.
xi. 27. ‘There is no _condemnation_ to them that are in Christ Jesus.’
Rom. viii. 1. ‘Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all _iniquity_, and purify unto himself a people zealous of good
works.’ Titus ii. 14. ‘Because the creature [meaning mankind] shall be
delivered from the _bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty_
of the children of God.’ Rom. viii. 21. These scriptures clearly teach
what is gospel salvation. The recipients of it are liberated from the
bondage of sin and error; the ‘chains of darkness’ are broken, and
they enjoy a glorious liberty, a glorious deliveration, a glorious
salvation.”

“True, that is salvation; but the Bible also speaks of salvation from
_hell_.”

“The only passage in the Bible where deliverance from hell is spoken
of reads thus:--‘For great is thy mercy towards me; and thou hast
_delivered my soul from the lowest hell_.’ Psalms lxvi. 13. Here is
hell, the _lowest hell_, and the writer speaks of salvation from
it; but this hell is on earth, and the deliverance is a _present_
deliverance. David had sinned, and he expressed his sins and their
consequences by the term, hell; but he repented, reformed, obtained
forgiveness, and was delivered from the lowest hell into which he had
been plunged. And it was the mission of Jesus to save the world from
just such a hell, and from no other.”

“But the Bible speaks of salvation from hell in the future world--an
endless hell.”

“The Scriptures no where locate hell in the immortal world. It is
a condition of _moral corruption_, and, the world knows by sad
experience, that condition is experienced in this life. The terms,
‘eternal hell,’ ‘everlasting hell,’ ‘endless hell,’ do not once
occur in the good book. But if gospel salvation is deliverance from
such a wretched place, it is remarkable that the sacred writers say
nothing about it. The truth is, God never made such a horrible place
as theologians denominate hell, and consequently nobody is exposed to
its fiery surges, and all this talk about salvation from it, is simply
idle talk. But men do cherish evil thoughts, purposes, habits, and the
salvation the Bible contemplates is deliverance from those real evils.
Here is a trinity of evils, and to sever them from our souls and from
our life; to purify our thoughts, correct our habits, and rightly
direct our purposes, should be the end and aim of life. But to spend
life’s golden moments, trying to dodge imaginary evils, evils which
exist only in our creeds, and thereby make ourselves miserable, is
foolish, is suicidal. The only hell we need fear is _within_ our own
souls, not without, and away in yonder world; and if half the effort
was made to save the world from that hell, that is made to save it from
imaginary torments beyond the grave, much more would be accomplished
for humanity.”

Proceeded to Bainbridge, where I spent several days, and delivered
four sermons to an excited people. The doctrine of the Restitution was
hardly known there, even by name, but all classes attended my meetings
to hear the youthful speaker, and to learn something of his strange
doctrine. Some were mad and some were glad. One minister treated me
very kindly, and assisted several times in the services, but another
was boiling over with rage, but he heard me through. At the close of
the second discourse, he jumped to his feet, and told the people that
the speaker believed in no hell or devil, and for my part, he added, I
would as soon deny that there is a God or a heaven. I kindly informed
him that he was mistaken, that he had not understood me; that I
believed in all the hells and devils the Bible speaks of, and no more;
that possibly we might differ relative to the Bible meaning of those
subjects, and that it was very uncharitable to assert that I denied
the Bible because I differed from him in understanding it. Doing that
is not denying the Bible, but simply differing from the gentleman. He
then dashed into Revelation to prove that the devil was a huge monster,
almost equal to the Almighty, had his throne in the infernal regions,
where he reigned, “monarch of all he surveyed,” and that his eagle eye,
from the center of hell, beheld this earth and all therein, and he
not only attended to his infernal duties at home, but was constantly
besieging every man, woman and child of earth, and never forsook a soul
till it was fairly within the gates of the New Jerusalem. I replied,
that there was this difference between the speaker and myself--he was
a _Pagan_ and I was a _Christian_; I believed in _one_ God, and he, at
least, in _two_--the God of heaven, and the god of hell. And I exhorted
him to abandon his Paganism and embrace Christianity. He cooled down
some, and at the close of the meeting gave me his hand. I entered
Bainbridge a total stranger, and departed from it with the blessings of
many.

I went to Cincinnati by stage, and oh, what roads! There were no
railroads then, not even turnpikes. It was mud, mud, mud, nothing but
mud; stiff, black, deep mud. I forget how many times the stage broke
down, how many horses were killed, or how many times all hands had to
get out into the ocean of mud, and pry the stage out of the mud. But I
do remember, that when we reached Cincinnati, the horses, driver, stage
and passengers, were covered with rich Buckeye mud. Mr. West was then
preaching in the Queen city, in a small house, on Walnut street, and
Mr. Tizard and George Rogers were publishing the _Star in the West_.
Cincinnati then contained only twenty-five thousand inhabitants, but
now its population is fully two hundred thousand. Still, it was then
_the_ city of the West. St. Louis and Chicago were then mere villages,
now each of them is equal to Cincinnati in population. Surely, western
cities are great _growers_. Preached several times in C., and made
many pleasant acquaintances. I was urged to remain and labor in the
vicinity, but I had resolved to go South, and no persuasion could
change my purpose. I had to learn my mistake by experience.

I went on foot, down the Ohio river. Stopped at North Bend, saw General
Harrison, who then resided there, and spent several hours in his
company. He was very kind and social. He told me he had thought much
about religion, believed in its reality and usefulness, that he could
not subscribe to the eternity of punishment, but did not know about
the salvation of all; but added the General, “I believe God is just,
wise, good and merciful, and that all will end well, but what that end
is to be I know not. I must wait for the developments of the great
teacher--death.” Soon after, he was elected President of the United
States. I saw him several times during the presidential campaign; heard
him make his Dayton speech to congregated thousands, and read with
tearful eyes, the announcement of his death, one short month after his
inauguration, and have since lingered around his grave, on the banks of
the Ohio.

I next went to Rising Sun, Ind., where I preached every day for a week.
This was my first advent into Indiana. Since then, I have traveled
through its length and its breadth, and preached in nearly every town
within its borders. Much interest was manifested in the meetings at
Rising Sun, and large congregations attended. One man, I was informed,
a member of some orthodox church, who attended one of the meetings,
became so excited, during the service, that he ate all the tobacco he
could find in his pockets--three large plugs. Since then, a society has
been organized there, and a church built. Perhaps the good seed sown
then, in after years yielded some fruit. Seven miles down the river is
Patriot, where I stopped ten days, and delivered five discourses. The
principal families of the place were of the liberal faith, excellent
people, and practical Christians. They loved the truth, loved to talk
about it, and loved to attend the services of the sanctuary. That place
was an oasis in the desert--no controversy, no denunciation, but peace,
love and harmony reigned. A fine meeting-house was built soon after I
was there, and the society prospered for several years. But pecuniary
misfortunes overtaking some of the leading members, and the business
of the town diminishing, nearly broke up the society. After a pleasant
sojourn with the Patriot friends, I went to Louisville, Ky., where I
preached several times in a large hall. I had not been in Kentucky
before, but since then have traveled extensively in that state. In this
city, E. M. Pingree lived, studied, labored and died. He died young,
in the midst of usefulness, loved and honored by all who knew him. He
was a strong man, gathered many friends around him, and built up what
seemed to be a permanent society, but it did not prosper long after his
death, and is now extinct. Gad Chapin was in L. on my first visit, and
is there still--a patriarch in our Israel.

At Louisville I took passage on the steamer “Commercial” for New
Orleans, fifteen hundred miles down the Ohio and Mississippi rivers.
Nothing of much interest occurred on the voyage. I delivered three
discourses, at the request of the captain and passengers, on three
subjects--Judgment, Punishment, Salvation--and theological points were
the principal subjects of discussion the ten days occupied in going
to New Orleans. The merits and demerits of Universalism were pretty
freely canvassed by all, from the captain to the barber. Captain Rudd,
the commander, was of the liberal faith. I met him in after years in
St. Louis, where he died of yellow fever. He was a good officer, and a
generous friend.

I arrived at New Orleans in January. Ten days had transported me from
winter to summer weather; from where the earth was bound in chains of
ice, and covered with snow, to where mother earth was teeming with
vegetable life, and covered with a carpet, in which were blended the
tints of the rainbow. Jack Frost was busy, biting ears and fingers, in
Louisville, but in New Orleans gnats and musquitoes were fully as eager
to bite at every exposed point. I heard Dr. Clapp, but he had not then
embraced the better faith, and I formed no acquaintance with him. I
traveled all over the city, and visited the battle ground where General
Jackson gave the English such a drubbing. I wanted to preach on the
spot, but could not find a door of entrance. No one seemed to care for
any thing but money, and dissipation. Mammon and Bacchus were the gods
mostly worshiped. The churches on Sunday were nearly empty, but the
theaters, museums, gambling dens, and grog-shops, were crowded. There
were doubtless some righteous men there, but to a stranger, they seemed
to be as scarce as they were in Sodom of old.




CHAPTER III.


  A SEA VOYAGE--A MEETING AT SEA--TORNADO--STRANGE VESSEL--IN
  TEXAS--TRAVELS TO HOUSTON--HARD FARE--THE COUNTRY--SLEEPING ON THE
  GROUND--VERY THIRSTY--MUST HAVE WATER--COLORADO RIVER--SOUND ASLEEP
  ON ITS BANKS--CROSSES THE RIVER ON LOGS--CORN CAKE--A SURPRISE--IN
  HOUSTON--GENERAL HOUSTON--THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF TEXAS--SAN JACINTO
  BATTLE GROUND--A PANDEMONIUM--BUCK WHEAT CAKES--EMBARKED FOR NEW
  ORLEANS--A CONDEMNED VESSEL--ON ALLOWANCE--IN NEW ORLEANS--A
  CONTRAST--AGUE AND FEVER--UP THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

Desiring to see more of the world, I embarked for Matagorda, Texas,
on board of a brig, bound for that place. A steam tug towed us to the
Balize, and we were soon winding our way towards the destined port.
There were many emigrants on board, going to Texas, to make themselves
homes. As soon as it became known that I was a clergyman, I was invited
to hold services. I stood on the quarter-deck, my hearers, numbering
about one hundred, gathered around me--some on deck and some in the
rigging. My text was, “And he arose, and rebuked the winds, and the
sea, and there was a great calm.” I commenced by speaking of the
storms to which the sea is subject, and then spoke of that ONE, who
has perfect control of its mountain waves, and of the hurricane that
lashes the mighty deep into such fury. One word from Him turned the
headlong tornado into a calm, and the angry surges into repose. Life is
a sea, and we are all voyagers, sailing from port to port. Sometimes
we have fair weather, and sometimes foul weather. To-day the sun may
shine bright, and the air be as gentle as an infant’s breath, and our
bark may glide smoothly along, like a vessel on the mirrored deep;
to-morrow, clouds and darkness may gather around, the storms of human
passion, or of adversity may threaten the destruction of us and ours,
and in despair we may give up all as lost. But let us remember, through
the whole journey of life, that there is One who controls the storms of
life as well as the storms of the ocean, and to every troubled heart he
does or will say, “Peace--be still.” A hymn was sung, in which nearly
all, sailors and passengers, participated.

In an hour after services, a small cloud was observed in the west. The
captain, knowing what it betokened, ordered the vessel put in trim for
a gale. In a few minutes, the wind was howling through the rigging, and
the vessel plunging from wave to wave, as if eager to flee from the
wrath of the storm-king. The gale continued above an hour, when the
wind abated, the clouds dispersed, the sun shone bright, and the sea
soon became as smooth as a mirror. That latitude, at that season of the
year, is subject to such gusts of passion. A few nights after, when I
was sound asleep on the quarter-deck, for it was too hot to rest below,
one of these gales crossed our track, and a huge wave breaking over the
vessel, dashed me across the deck, when I scrambled up, and ran into
the cabin, not fancying so unceremonious a sea-bath. One night, a man
jumped overboard, and was lost--he must have been insane. Friends at
home probably waited with alternate hope and fear for his return, and,
perhaps, never knew of his sad fate. At that time, Mexico and Texas
were at war, and armed vessels were in the gulf looking after prizes.
One day, a large ship was observed in the distance, bearing down upon
us, without showing colors. Our captain was alarmed. With a pale face,
he eyed the stranger through his telescope. We were all fearful it was
a Mexican armed vessel, and that we should be taken into Matamoras;
but we were finally relieved by the ship showing English colors,
tacking eastward and leaving us.

We sailed up the Matagorda bay a few miles, but the water being
shallow, I got on board a lighter, and went to a village, the name of
which I do not now remember. When I landed in Texas, I supposed I had
delivered my last sermon. I had become tired of wandering about the
world, and had had no opportunity to settle before I had concluded
to quit the ministry. But going to Texas at that early day to find a
home, was certainly a wild and foolish project; and I had been there
but a short time, when I repented in sackcloth and ashes, for having
taken the step I had, and resolved to return to the United States, and
continue in the ministry. I immediately commenced making preparation to
go to Houston by the land route, and thence to New Orleans by water.
The distance to Houston was one hundred and sixty miles, and I resolved
to go there on foot. Being informed that there were but few inhabitants
on the road, and most of them in a starving condition, as the Mexican
army had the season previous passed through that region, I carried food
to last me to the end of my land journey. No tea, coffee, sugar, salt
or flour could be obtained for love or money. Every body lived on fresh
beef, without salt, pepper or butter, save here and there an aristocrat
who had a little corn meal in his larder. I bought some beef, cut it in
slices, and dried it in the sun.

With a good supply of dried beef, and nothing else, a tin canteen,
a blanket and a staff, I commenced my journey, on foot and alone,
through the wild prairies of Texas. I found the country to be nearly
all prairie, the surface quite level, and the soil rich and deep.
The forest trees were generally covered with ivy, which gave them
a melancholy appearance. Live oaks abounded in some localities.
Alligators flourished in the streams, and Indians, snakes, tarantulas
and horned toads on the land. I often traveled a day without seeing a
human being or his habitation. When night came on, I would stop, eat my
dried beef, drink some water, which I had carried, perhaps, all day,
and then roll myself in my blanket, lay on the ground, and go to sleep,
not knowing that there was a human being within miles of me. I was
four weeks in going to Houston, and did not sleep in a house one night
during that time.

I well remember how I suffered one day from thirst. It was a very warm
day, and my little stock of water was exhausted at my morning repast.
I expected to find more of the blessed beverage about noon in a small
grove. I reached the spot, but no water was there; the bed where there
had been a stream was dry and hard. It was a sore disappointment, for
I was very thirsty. As I could not eat my dry beef without water, I
pressed towards the Colorado river, which seemed to be about fifteen
miles distant, for I could see the timber bordering on the stream.
I reached the timber a little after dark, but how far it was to the
river, I knew not. I plunged into the forest in the direction I knew
the stream must lay, as it ran southward. The moon, which had just
risen, was my only guide, for be it known, I was on no road. It proved
to be about four miles to the river, and how I got through, I know
not. There was no path, the thick foliage of the forest admitted but
little moonlight, and the underbrush, vines and branches of trees, made
the whole distance a perfect thicket. But I went through with a rush,
regardless of scratches, snakes, or anything else, for water I must
have. About ten o’clock, I reached the bank of the river, reflecting
the full moon, which had been my guide through the dense forest; and
never did a traveler on the Arabian desert behold the long sought pool
with more delight. It seemed to be my friend, my savior; and if I had
been an idolator, I should have fallen down and worshiped it. I filled
my canteen, and drank till I was satisfied. I then bathed my head,
face, hands and feet in the glorious river. On the bank I partook of
my humble repast--dried beef and water--with a thankful heart. With my
blanket around me, I laid down on the ground and slept, never better,
till the hot morning sun, shining in my face, awaked me, when it was
about two hours’ high. I have often wondered how I dared to sleep that
night, knowing as I did, that there were alligators in the river, and
bears, wolves, and poisonous reptiles in the woods. In the morning, I
again partook of beef and water, with an excellent relish.

But a new difficulty now presented itself. A deep river was before me,
without a bridge or a boat, and I could not swim. But cross the stream
I must by some means. In the first place, I explored the river, up and
down, several miles, hoping to find some one to aid me, but not a sign
of a human being, or human habitation could I discover. I resolved to
attempt to cross the river on a log, and after much hard work succeeded
in getting two logs of sufficient size, into the water, fastened them
together with strips of my blanket, and with pole in hand, launched
into the river. The stream being quite rapid, my frail craft floated
down about one mile, but I safely landed on the opposite shore without
much trouble. After wandering in the canebrakes two hours, I struck a
road, and thanked God and took courage.

I soon came to a house, and had the good fortune to obtain a quart of
corn, which I ground in an old coffee mill, and made some excellent
corn bread of meal and water. I passed through San Felipe, where was
once a village, but only its ruins then remained, for the Mexicans had
destroyed it. Waking one morning about sunrise, I was amazed by the
presence of six naked Indians, squatted in the grass around me. I
jumped to my feet; they saw that I was astonished, but I noticed they
smiled. Taking courage by that friendly token, I walked up to them, and
extended my right hand. They offered me the pipe of peace, which was
gladly accepted. They did not understand a word of English, nor I a
word of Indian. We talked, however, in gestures. They remained an hour,
when we separated in friendship.

When within thirty miles of Houston, I sold my watch for fifteen
dollars, expecting that I should need the money to help pay expenses
to the States. After receiving the money, I heard a woman remark, “It
will do him no good, for he will spend it all for liquor in Houston.”
I suppose she would have thought I lied, if I had told her that I had
never drank a glass of liquor. Arriving at Houston, I renovated self
and clothing, for both were rather dilapidated. Samuel Houston was
then president of Texas. I was in company with him several times, and
dined once in the log-cabin, where he boarded. He was a good talker,
but an awful swearer. Oath after oath rolled from his tongue without
an effort. It is said that General Jackson was an _eloquent_ swearer,
but I have doubts of his beating General Houston in that department
of eloquence. I witnessed his departure for the interior of Texas, to
treat with some Indian tribes. The ferryman did not handle the boat to
suit the president, and he poured battery after battery of oaths on the
poor fellow’s head. On leaving, he embraced, after the French fashion,
his friends, who had followed him to the boat. I was on the San Jacinto
battle ground, a few miles from the city. It was a short but decided
contest. The Mexican forces were totally routed, and Santa Anna taken
prisoner. That battle crowned Houston with glory and honor in Texas.
The town of Houston, when I was there, was a moral desert. Vice of most
every name and grade reigned triumphant--it was a hell on earth. The
Attorney-General of Texas, while I was there, roamed the streets half
of one night, drunk, and hatless, coatless, bootless, daring any one
to fight with him. The people laughed about it as if it was a trifling
matter, and of common occurrence. It is to be hoped that the morals of
that place have improved.

Wishing to go to New Orleans by water, I went in a lighter down
Buffalo bayou to Galveston bar, where the steamer was anchored. The
passage down occupied three days, and that vessel was a perfect
pandemonium--the officers and hands were quarreling or fighting most
of the time. Dirks and pistols were freely used. Buckwheat cakes and
fat hog-sides were served to us three times a day. And oh, what cakes!
The cook baked them about an inch thick, without any rising properties,
and put them on the table stone cold. Fine cakes--thick, cold and
solid. I finally reached the steamer, and the captain promised us a
quick passage and good fare. But I soon learned, when it was too late,
that the boat was an old, rotten, condemned hulk; that provisions
were scarce, and that the captain was a scamp. Time and again the
engine broke, or some of the running gear. Water and food soon being
exhausted, we were allowed one pint of water and one Boston cracker
per day. The fuel being all consumed, we had to burn part of the boat
to get into port. We were a week in going from Galveston bar to the
mouth of the Mississippi river, when the trip should have been made in
thirty-six hours. Fortunately we had pleasant weather, for one such
squall as we had going out, would have sent the whole concern to the
bottom of the gulf.

When I returned to New Orleans it was mid-summer, and the city
presented a very different appearance from what it did when I was
there the previous winter. Then business was at its zenith, now at its
nadir; then the hotels, streets and marts of trade were crowded, now
there was plenty of room; then steamboats and vessels were receiving
and discharging freight for and from every clime, now the shipping was
very meager; then the weather was pleasant, now the heat was scorching,
burning, melting; then it was healthy, now the yellow fever and almost
every other fever, was raging. Exposure and hard fare in Texas,
ultimated in ague and fever. I had several chills while in Houston;
when at sea beyond the land breeze, I was free from them; but as soon
as I inhaled the air from shore, they returned with increased violence,
and it was two years before I entirely regained my former good health.

I was soon on board of a steamer bound for Cincinnati, and after a
voyage of two weeks, landed at Leavenworth, Ind., where I remained
three months doctoring for the ague.




CHAPTER IV.


  LABORS OF E. B. MANN--N. WADSWORTH--OWNER OF A HORSE--PREACH IN
  INDIANA AND KENTUCKY--A PROFANE LIFE--GENERAL CLARKE--ATHEISM--THE
  EYELESS FISH--A PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER’S WISDOM--NO HELL, NO
  HEAVEN--TRAVEL IN OHIO--ANOTHER PREACHER REPLIES--LABORS IN
  DAYTON--D. R. BIDDLECOM--GEORGE MESSENGER--R. SMITH’S SOMERSAULT--J.
  A. GURLEY--GEORGE ROGERS--START FOR INDIANA--BATTLE IN
  HARRISON--UNIVERSALISM AN OLD DOCTRINE, AND OF GOD--PARTIALISM AN
  OLD DOCTRINE, BUT OF SATAN--GROVE MEETING--FATHER ST. JOHN--BADLY
  TREATED--JOHN O’KANE ON HIS CREED--IN INDIANAPOLIS--A. LONGLEY--A
  HORSE--QUESTIONED BY A METHODIST--IN TERRE HAUTE--VERY UNPOPULAR.

Partially recovering, I resumed my former work of traveling and
preaching. E. B. Mann resided near Leavenworth, and labored in the
counties in Indiana and Kentucky, bordering on the Ohio river. He also
distributed a large number of denominational books. His circuit, which
was about two hundred miles round, he traveled on horseback, once a
month. He was not graced by education or refinement, yet his labors
were blessed with a good degree of success. He is now dead, and his
mortal remains repose near Leavenworth, the center of his labors for
many years.

I lectured in L. and vicinity three weeks, and then proceeded to
Louisville, Ky. N. Wadsworth was then residing there, and publishing
a paper called _The Berean_; and at his earnest solicitation, I spent
three months in obtaining subscribers for it. Mr. W. was formerly
a Methodist minister, but then cherished a more liberal faith. His
talent was above mediocrity, his acquirements fair, was a good man, and
devoted to the cause he espoused, and the profession of his choice. He
was small in stature, and feeble in health--too small and feeble for
his large and active mind. A year after, he moved to Troy, Mo., his
periodical was discontinued, and he died of consumption, after laboring
there with excellent success, about one year. His widow resides there
still, and although she has changed her name, the home of brother and
sister Sydnor is ever a welcome retreat for our ministers. It has been
my privilege to spend many pleasant hours in their company. The humble
grave of my early friend is in the Troy cemetery; and I have read the
brief monumental inscription on the cold marble at its head, through
tearful eyes.

I bought a horse of Mr. Wadsworth, and agreed to pay him in obtaining
subscribers for his paper. It was the first horse I ever owned, and I
felt quite rich, and very independent. I preached in most of the towns
within fifty miles of Louisville, in Kentucky and Indiana. In Salem,
Ind., I delivered a series of sermons. A merchant there told me that
his counting-room was his chapel, his ledger his Bible, and money his
religion. He was then doing a large and lucrative business. A few
years after, he had no counting-room, no ledger, no money, and died
a miserable death--the natural result of so profane a life. General
Clarke, an old Indian warrior, resided near Salem. He attended my
meetings, and I was often at his house. He said he had helped steal
Kentucky and Indiana from the Indians. He was an intelligent man,
but a zealous Atheist. He admitted that faith in a God of goodness,
wisdom and justice, and in the immortal blessedness of mankind, was
more satisfactory, and yielded more happiness than Atheism; and if
such exalted and benevolent sentiments had received his attention ere
his present views had become permanently established, he might have
embraced them, but now he was too old to learn. I used to rejoin,
that his admission was fatal to his creed. If a belief in God and
immortality confers more happiness than the denial of a God, and a
hereafter, that was the best evidence that Atheism was false, and
religion truth, for truth always confers more happiness than error.
Virtue is truth and vice is falsehood, because the former is adapted
to our nature, and makes us happy, while the latter is a violation of
our nature, and darkens and deforms the mind. For the same reason your
theory, I would add, must be false, and mine correct. Not “too old
to learn,” General. Your body is frail--it has been dying these many
years, but your mind is vigorous. Why stop learning? If religion is
true, death, that is fast destroying your body, will not invade your
mind--that will live to learn forever.

Near Salem was a cave, containing water, in which were fish without
eyes. God creates no superfluities. The fish of every sea, lake, river,
have eyes, because there is light in those waters, but the beams of the
sun had never penetrated that cavern, therefore eyes were useless, and
hence the denizens of that eternal dungeon, have no visional organ.
Nothing is created in vain; every thing answers some useful purpose in
the economy of the Creator. Here is a solid foundation on which to rest.

In Bedford, Ind., a Presbyterian minister abruptly attacked me at
the close of a discourse. “If the pains of the damned will cease,”
said he, “so will the joys of the saved; for the words that express
the misery of the one, express the happiness of the other.” Never, I
replied, was a man more mistaken. The Bible speaks of endless life,
but not a word about endless death. The terms, “endless death,”
“endless misery,” “endless woe,” “endless damnation,” “endless hell,”
found in the creeds of men, do not once occur in the Bible. Read all
that Moses and the prophets, Jesus and the apostles, said or wrote,
and you will not find those terms once, not even once, in the Old
or New Testaments. “Endless” life is a Bible term, but those other
_endlesses_ are wretched fictions. The Bible says, “O _hell_, I will be
thy _destruction_;” but where does it say, “O _heaven_, I will be thy
destruction?!”

Finding but few persons of the liberal faith in the vicinity of
Louisville, I concluded to go to Ohio. Preached in Cincinnati, Mount
Healthy, Hamilton, Oxford and Middletown. In the latter place a
clergyman attended my meetings, and at the close of every sermon
entered his solemn protest against what had been said. He was a German,
and in one of his harangues said, “This fellow believes the fire will
be _squenched_, and I believe the fire will not be _squenched_.” But he
became so interested, that he proposed traveling with me a few weeks,
but not caring about his company, I did not accept of his proposition.

Proceeded to Dayton; and having reference to no one, I called on the
sheriff, and engaged the Court-house for the next day--Sunday. Wrote
some notices of the proposed meeting, and while putting them up in
different parts of the town, a gentleman introduced himself, who
proved to be the mayor of the city. He kindly informed me of a man of
my faith, on whom I called, and was received with a hearty welcome. I
delivered two discourses on Sunday, and on Monday morning was preparing
to leave town, when several friends called on me, and urged me to
remain, at least, a few months. The town, they said, had just been
scourged by a crazy revival, and if I should tarry there awhile, they
were sure a good society would be established. I told them I could not
remain, as I was under obligation to travel to extend the circulation
of _The Berean_, and must soon have, at least, seventy subscribers, to
discharge my obligation to its publisher. “If that number should be
obtained in this town, will you tarry with us?” queried the gentlemen.
I replied, that I would. Notice was given that there would be a
meeting that evening. I delivered a discourse, and at the close of
it, a friend informed the congregation, that I had consented to remain
three months, if seventy subscribers should be obtained in town for
_The Berean_; and in a few minutes the required number were secured.
We soon organized a society, a choir, and our meetings were well
attended during my sojourn in that pleasant town. I wrote two sermons
every week, and committed them to memory--did not take the manuscript
into the desk with me. The society paid me one hundred dollars for my
services. My health not being good, I declined remaining after the
three months had expired I stipulated to remain. The society, after I
left, built a meeting-house, and prospered for several years. I am not
informed of its present condition.

While residing in Dayton, I visited Springfield, Centerville, and many
other places within twenty or thirty miles of the city, in all of
which I delivered my message. In the former place, George Messenger,
a minister of the Common Salvation, was residing, and the society was
building a meeting-house. D. R. Biddlecom, well known in the West as
a minister of the Restitution, visited me while I resided in Dayton.
He was then traveling and scattering the good seed broadcast over the
land. He now lives in Dayton, and is still engaged in the good work.

Taking leave of my dear friends in Dayton, I proceeded to Cincinnati.
Stopped in Mason, and delivered four sermons. Here I met Robert Smith,
a singular kind of a man, but of considerable ability. He deemed it
wrong to pray in public, baptize, or partake of the eucharist. Some of
his views being offensive to our people, he was often coldly treated.
This offended him, and he subsequently joined the Reformers, prayed
in public, eat bread and drank wine every Sabbath, and taught that
immersion in water is a condition of salvation. When I returned to
Cincinnati, J. A. Gurley was publishing the _Star in the West_ in that
city. He was an active and enterprising man, possessed respectable
talent, and was a forcible speaker. He was a popular preacher in
the West, as long as he continued in the ministry. He made himself
a beautiful home near Cincinnati, and lived under his own vine and
fig-tree. Having made two or three hundred thousand dollars--on
paper--by Chicago town-lots, he abandoned the _Star_ and the ministry,
and jumped into the muddy pool of politics. He was a member of Congress
two terms, and when he died, was governor of Arizona. Here I met for
the first time, George Rogers, a well known minister of our faith, and
the author of several acceptable books. During his brief ministry, he
traveled extensively in the South and West, publishing the glad tidings
of life and immortality. He was a little man physically, but a great
man intellectually and morally; his voice was feeble, but his words
were weighty. He broke down a good constitution by hard labor, and died
in the prime of life.

Mr. Rogers had recently traveled in the interior and western portions
of Indiana, and advised me to spend a few months in those sections of
that state. In a few days I was on the road, bound for Indiana. It was
then the middle of May, 1838, and I did not expect to return till the
latter part of autumn. Mounting my faithful horse, I rode to Harrison,
where I preached in the evening. As soon as I had said amen, George
Campbell, a Reformer, expressed a desire to reply. He was told he
would be heard with attention. Among other things he remarked, “That
Universalism is a _new doctrine_, and therefore cannot be the gospel,
for that is _old_--most eighteen hundred years old.” I replied, that
it was as old as revelation; and that several of its distinguishing
features were revealed to our first parents by the Creator. To them
he said, “In the day you sin you shall surely die.” They did sin,
and they died the death threatened. St. Paul calls it a “death in
trespasses and in sins;” “to be carnally minded,” he says, “is death,”
and he terms this death the wages of sin. This is the death--a moral
death--that God threatened the primitive pair; and if we sin we die
the same death--no mistake about that. Mark also the important fact,
that they were to suffer this punishment in THE DAY they sinned. It
was not to be deferred till the next day, next year, or next world,
but in the day, when and where they sinned, they were to begin to
suffer the penalty of transgression. It is as true now as it was six
thousand years ago, that in _the day_ we sin we are punished; it is
as true in this town as it was in the Garden of Eden, that in _the
day_ we sin we are punished; it is as true of us as it was of Adam and
Eve, that in _the day_ we sin we are punished. Truth is eternal; the
laws of God are unchangable, the same yesterday, to-day and forever.
As sin and its penalty were chained together in the beginning, it
is thus now, and ever will be thus. Here then, in the beginning, we
are taught the _certainty_ of punishment--“in the day you sin you
_shall_ be punished;” and here also we are taught, that punishment is
_immediate_--in the day they sinned the penalty was to overtake them.
These ancient truths we believe and preach--they are portions of the
gospel. But my friend, Mr. Campbell, denies all this. He contends that
punishment is _not certain_, is _not immediate_; that a person may sin
three-score years and ten, without being punished, for remember, he
denied that God judges in the earth; he said, that was a new doctrine,
one of our heresies, it was not taught in the Bible. He also teaches,
that a man, after spending seventy years in crime of the blackest dye,
can, by complying with certain conditions, escape all punishment in
eternity, and occupy as high a seat in heaven as St. Paul or St. John.
In a word, Mr. C. denies squarely and fully the everlasting truth of
the ancient record, that “in _the day_ you sin you _shall_ be punished.”

But the gentleman is not the _first_ to make that denial, and this is
not the first _place_ where this _truth_ has been called a _lie_. He
has an ancient precedent, he is following an old leader, has taken
lessons from an old master. The serpent preached in Eden’s garden just
what the gentleman has been preaching here to-night, with so much zeal.
“_Ye shall not surely die_,” said his snakeship; God will not _surely_
punish you; there is a way to escape. Besides, don’t believe a word of
it, that you will be punished in _the day_ you sin. Mr. C. has taken
the serpent’s text this evening, and I give him credit for sticking
to the text of the father of lies. Our doctrine, then, relative
to punishment, is not _new_, neither is Mr. Campbell’s doctrine,
concerning punishment, _new_. But ours and his came from different
sources; one is of God, who is the author of truth, the other is of the
serpent, the father of lies. They are both ancient doctrines, but judge
ye which is true.

The doctrine of salvation--universal salvation--is not a new thing,
either, under the sun, as Mr. C. affirmed. Immediately after sin, and
its dire results, entered into the world, and while the first sinners
were yet trembling with guilt in the blissful garden, it was revealed
to them that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent’s head.
It is generally considered that “the seed of the woman” was the future
Christ, whose advent occurred four thousand years afterwards. This
_seed_ was promised through the Jewish patriarchs--“In thee and in
thy _seed_ shall all nations of the earth be blessed.” And St. Paul
distinctly asserts, that Jesus is here intended. “Now to Abraham and
his _seed_ were the promises made. He saith not, And to _seeds_, as
of many; but as of one, And to thy _seed_, which IS CHRIST.” Gal.
iii. 16. The _seed_, then, promised to our first parents, and to the
patriarchs, was Jesus Christ. He was to bruise the serpent’s head.
Serpent, in the Bible, is a symbol of sin. As a serpent is a low,
vile and cruel reptile, so vice is low, vile and cruel. It worms its
slimy folds into our thoughts, purposes, character, and life, and is
sure to poison every thing it touches. But Jesus Christ is to bless
all nations, by bruising the serpent’s _head_. When we wish to kill a
snake, our blows are aimed at his _head_; so Jesus is to crush the head
of the serpent, that is, destroy sin, and thus _bless all nations_, as
the patriarchs were promised.

Three vitally important truths, then, were revealed to mankind in the
morning of creation. 1st. Punishment for transgressing is _certain_.
2d. It is _immediate_. 3d. Sin and its results are temporary, for it is
the purpose and promise of God that the seed of the woman shall make an
end of sin, and thus bless all the nations of the earth.

As soon as Mr. Campbell’s discourse was disposed of, a Presbyterian
minister, by the name of Thomas, spent half an hour in trying to prove
that countless millions of Adam’s race would be the victims of Almighty
wrath, world without end. I replied to him, and when we got through it
was midnight. The congregation was large, and was so deeply interested
that nearly all remained till that late hour. The next Sunday, I
delivered two discourses in the Snow Settlement, to immense assemblies.
The meetings were held in a grove, and a wagon was my pulpit. In
Brookville, I also spoke to the people. Father St. John, a venerable
man, resided there, and for many years occasionally dispensed the word
of life. His silvery locks are now in the grave, but his soul, I trust,
is with God. Spent several days in West Union, and although I told the
people that God was their Father, Friend and Benefactor, some treated
me with bitter malignity--threatened to drive me out of town, and even
to horse-whip me. Since then, a better spirit has prevailed. There is
now a society and meeting in that place. Let not the reformer despair
if his mission is rejected; every crucified truth will rise again, and
go on conquering and to conquer.

Spent a Sunday in Connersville, preached twice, and heard John O’Kane,
a noted minister among the Reformers, once. He has, since then, held
several oral debates with our ministers. Not knowing much about the
faith of his sect, I asked him the following questions, and received
the subjoined answers:

“What must we do to be saved?”

“Believe in Christ, repent of our sins, and be baptized.”

“What do you mean by baptism?”

“Immersion in water.”

“Do you mean to say, that no one can be saved without immersion?”

“There is no promise that any one can.”

“That is not answering my question. Do _you_ contend that there is no
salvation without water baptism?”

“The New Testament gives us no assurance, that a soul can be redeemed
without baptism.”

“But what is YOUR opinion?”

“No matter what my opinion may be.”

“Cannot the heathen be saved without being baptized?”

“I have nothing to do with the heathen.”

“Cannot children, dying in childhood, be saved without being baptized?”

“Yes.”

“Then you admit that _one third_ of mankind are saved without baptism.
But you just said, that baptism was a _condition_ of salvation, and
that you had no evidence a soul could be saved without complying with
that condition. Your system contradicts itself. If God can save one
third of mankind without baptism, can he not save the remaining two
thirds without baptism?”

“I have no evidence that he will.”

Since I had this conversation with Mr. O’Kane, I have often come in
contact with persons of his denomination, and they all contradict
themselves as he did. They all assert, that water baptism is a
condition of salvation, without any qualification or exception. But
after they have laid down this platform, ask them if the salvation of
children depends on being baptized, and they will say, nay. Ask them if
the heathen can be saved without baptism, and they will give an evasive
answer.

I spoke in several of the towns on the National road, between Richmond
and Indianapolis, and generally had fair congregations. In the latter
place, the capital of Indiana, I delivered several sermons in the
Court-house, but found only two families of the liberal faith--C.
Vanhouton and A. Longley. The latter was doing business in town, and
preaching in the neighboring villages on Sundays. He still resides in
Indiana, and is still preaching the gospel. He is a worthy man, and
a sincere and devout Christian. He has been a minister of the gospel
about forty years. My horse being lame, Mr. Vanhouton furnished a colt,
that had never been rode, in its stead; but I soon broke him, and he
carried me on my mission very pleasantly. When I returned him, five
months afterwards, he jumped with delight. I love a horse, love to ride
and take care of him. He is a noble animal, and merits kind treatment
from man. But he is often savagely abused. I always want to kick the
fellow, who ill treats a horse. He has a bad heart.

I lectured in Greencastle several days. A Methodist minister, desiring
to know more about our faith, questioned me thus:

“Do you believe in the Trinity?”

“No; I believe in one God, and no more.”

“What do you think of the person of Christ?”

“He was a created, subordinate, and dependent being; the Son of God,
the Son of man.”

“For how many did he die?”

“He tasted death for _every man_,--‘Gave himself a ransom for _all_.’”

“Did he make a vicarious atonement?”

“No. He came to teach us that God is our Father, Judge and Savior; that
we are immortal beings, shall live forever, and that we should love
God, and our fellow men.”

“But did he not come to reconcile God to the world?”

“It was the mission of Jesus to reconcile man to God, by the influence
of truth, and his own noble example. God is right, man is wrong, and
Jesus preached, lived and died, to advance man in all things pure and
good--to make man Godlike, and hence it is said, that ‘God is in Christ
reconciling the world to himself.’”

“Do you believe in experimental religion?”

“Religion does no good unless we individually experience its blessings.
It is not an abstraction, a speculation, but a _reality_, something to
be known, felt, experienced; it is a _life_.”

“Do you believe in conversion?”

“Yes; conversion from error to truth, from sin to holiness, from
depravity to purity, from a disloyal to a loyal life. But this
conversion begins, progresses and is consummated in perfect harmony
with the laws of the mind. It is as natural a process as is the growth
of the body.”

“Do you believe in a hell?”

“The word hell in the Bible has several distinct signification. 1st. It
often means the grave. 2d. Temporal destruction. 3d. Moral degradation.
4th. The state of the dead. But hell in no sense is endless in
duration.”

“Do you believe in a general judgment?”

“In a _general_ and _everlasting_ judgment. All are now judged by the
eternal laws of God, and we rise or fall, are happy or miserable, as
we obey or disobey them. This judgment is also everlasting. Through
all time, and through all eternity, happiness will result from obeying
the laws of God, and misery from disobeying them. Entering the spirit
world, will not change our natures, and the laws of the Creator are the
same there as here.”

“But do you not believe in a day of judgment?”

“Yes; in a day and in days of judgment. Judgment commenced six thousand
years ago, and it is not yet closed. ‘All God’s ways are judgment,’ the
Bible teaches us. Particular calamities befalling nations and cities,
are called judgment days. The gospel dispensation is termed a judgment
day.”

“But do you not believe in a judgment day at the end of time, when the
immortal destiny of each of Adam’s race will be immutably fixed for
eternal weal or woe?”

“No, sir; I can find no reason, or philosophy, or scripture for such
a notion. The destiny of each individual will not be determined at
the end of time, but it was determined in the purpose of God from all
eternity. Man is immortal, and is destined to become more and more
Godlike, intellectually and morally, as the eternal ages roll along.”

“Are wicked men punished?”

“In the language of the Bible, I believe, that ‘He that doeth wrong
shall receive for the wrong he hath done, and there is no respect
of persons.’ ‘Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go
unpunished.’ ‘God is not mocked; whatsoever a man soweth, that shall
he also reap. He that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption.’”

“You deny though, everlasting punishment.”

“I believe in everlasting punishment in the Bible sense of the word,
but not in the present popular sense. Punishment is as lasting as sin;
but the Bible no where teaches that sin and wrong are immortal.”

“How long do you suppose punishment will continue?”

“I know not how long. If you can inform me how long men will be
corruptible, earthy, sensual, I will tell you how long they will
suffer.”

“Do you think that in the other world all will be equally happy?”

“There will, doubtless, be different degrees of purity, virtue and
happiness, on the other side of the grave. There must be a moral
connection between this life and the life to come. As we end here we
shall begin there. Character belongs to the soul, and the death of the
body will not make a wise man of a fool, or a saint of a sinner.”

“Do you believe in the resurrection of the body?”

“I believe in the resurrection of _man_, the _inner man_, that which
now lives, thinks, and acts, but not of the body, these bones and
muscles, this flesh and blood. This body connects the spirit with the
material world, but when it shall be withdrawn from this outer sphere,
and live wholly in the interior world, it will have no farther use of
this physical frame. It will be clothed there with a body adapted to
that heavenly home.”

“Where is heaven?”

“Heaven is not a _place_, but a _condition_--a condition of wisdom,
purity, holiness. Heaven reigns in that soul, which is loyal to God.
There is a difference between heaven and the spirit world. The latter
is a _place_--it may be boundless space. Men may exist in that world
without knowing much of heaven, as they do exist in this world without
much heavenly mindedness.”

“Well, you entertain curious views. I do not see how you can reconcile
them with the Bible.”

I journeyed on to Terre Haute, where I delivered several discourses.
This was then a pleasant village, but now it is a large and flourishing
town, and one of the most beautiful places in the West. Its spacious
streets, flanked on each side by trees, shrubbery, lawns, flower
gardens and elegant dwellings, give it a charming appearance. It stands
on the east bank of the Wabash river, and on the margin of a rich
and beautiful prairie. Subsequently a society was organized, and a
meeting-house built, but for various reasons, which I need not name,
our cause, for many years, has been in a feeble condition in that city.
It has recently revived under the auspices of the Northwest Conference,
and an able minister, H. Jewell, is settled in the place. I rode to
Vincennes, seventy miles down the river, and preached in several
villages and neighborhoods, in not one of which the doctrine of the
Restitution had before been proclaimed. The people generally attended
my meetings, but I found but few believers in the Great Salvation.

Returning to Terre Haute, I went up the Wabash river, and preached in
Clinton, Eugene, Perryville, Attica, and West Point, places I have
often since visited. The religious principles I advocated were new to
nearly all the inhabitants of the Wabash Valley, where I was traveling.
There was here and there a believer, but nearly all the people knew
nothing of Universalism. “Why,” said a man to me, “you do not believe
in the Bible, do you?” When I informed him that I did, he was much
astonished; and he was perfectly amazed when he was told that I found
my faith in the Good Book. “I don’t know what you preach for,” said he,
“if all will be saved; and as to praying, of course, you don’t pray.”
This man’s knowledge of our faith was the knowledge nearly all the
people of that region had of it. I was regarded as an infidel, a wolf,
a blasphemer, an emissary of Satan. Women crossed the street when they
saw me coming, as if I was a walking pestilence; children passed me
as if they were afraid, and men looked suspicious when they came in
contact with me. But it was not thus with all--far from it. Most of
those I met with, though they knew nothing of Universalism, treated me
kindly, and listened respectfully to what I had to say.

I spent one month in Lafayette and Dayton, places seven miles apart. A
Methodist clergyman, by the name of Smith, attended my first meeting
in Lafayette, and gave notice that he would reply in the evening,
and invited me to attend and reply to him if I saw proper. Each of
us spoke several times, but I was far from being satisfied with my
defense. I considered it a failure, though my friends seemed to think
I did well. Mr. Smith was a pretty sharp man, an experienced preacher,
and accustomed to speaking without preparation. He knew he had the
advantage of me, and so followed me up for several Sabbaths, and
seemed determined to drive me out of the country, or shut my mouth.
We had five distinct encounters, and in the outcome he got the worst
of it, for he spent his strength in the beginning of the contest,
while I grew stronger as the discussion progressed. Two years after I
located in Lafayette, organized a society, commenced the publication of
_The Christian Teacher_, and several years after a meeting-house was
erected. In the interim of the discussions with Mr. Smith, I preached
in Dayton. Here a school teacher tried two or three times to demolish
me, but I survived his attacks. I found some excellent friends in this
place, a society was formed, and a few years after a temple was erected.

Preaching, debating, conversation, visiting and riding, occupied nearly
all my time, and what reading I did was chiefly on horseback. If I
had five or fifty miles to ride, I improved the occasion by reading
some useful book. I would pass travelers and farm-houses unnoticed. I
recollect, after spending a day in riding and reading, I put up at a
farm-house, and told the good woman I wanted no meat, tea or coffee for
supper. “What do you want?” said she, with amazement. “A little bread
and milk, if you please, and a whole candle, as I wish to write this
evening.” The candle was furnished, a pig’s face, a cold hoe-cake, and
a bowl of sour milk. She went to the neighboring village, Martinsville,
and reported that there was a crazy man at her house.

Proceeding on my journey, with book in hand, I rode to Logansport,
where I lectured twice. Have preached there often since. We have now an
elegant meeting-house in this pleasant and flourishing town, built by a
bequest of Colonel Pollard, who for many years was a prominent merchant
of the place. He will long be remembered with gratitude for his noble
gift. Though dead he yet speaks. Men of wealth, in disposing of their
possessions, would do well to remember religious societies, benevolent
and literary institutions, and those tried and faithful men who have
grown gray in the service of humanity. Such men devote their time and
talent to the world, and old age often finds them poor in this world’s
goods. Let the rich, when dying, consider them, and the cause for which
they have given their all.

Near Plymouth were congregated six hundred Pottowattamie Indians,
preliminary to moving them to the distant West. I spent several hours
with them. Asked the chief where they were going. “I don’t know.”
“Do you wish to remain here?” “Oh yes, oh yes. I leave the bones of
my fathers here; but where will my bones, and those of my children
be laid? No matter, no matter. The Indians are doomed.” A father and
mother buried their child with their own hands. Not a word was uttered,
not a tear was shed. “Lo, the poor Indian!” In a few more years the
sun will rise on the last original owner of our national domain. Our
swords and our vices have been doing their work of death ever since
the Indians welcomed the Pilgrims on Plymouth Rock, and they are rising
in judgment and condemning us. It seems to be a law of nature, that
a subjugated people must either blend with their conquerors or be
annihilated. The Indians will not unite with us, and destruction is
their doom. The weak, if they attempt to stand alone, fall. Their only
chance of salvation is in the alliance of the strong.

Lectured in Laporte and Door village, and then proceeded to Michigan
City, where I also held meetings. I also spoke in South Bend. A
Presbyterian clergyman opened his battery on me from his pulpit, which
has been called the coward’s castle. He said Universalism was false
for the following reasons: 1st, It conflicts with the justice of God;
2d, With the mercy of God; 3d, With the love of God; 4th, With reason;
5th, With sound philosophy; 6th, With the law of God; 7th, With the
gospel of Jesus Christ; 8th, With the Bible doctrine of sin; 9th, Of
punishment; 10th, Of faith; 11th, Of rewards; 12th, Of heaven; 13th, Of
hell; 14th, Because it is a new doctrine; 15th, The devil’s doctrine;
16th, A wicked doctrine; 17th, A licentious doctrine; 18th, Wicked men
and devils preach it. I replied to his long tirade. Our people now have
a society, meeting-house, and a settled minister in South Bend. There
is also a society and meeting-house four miles from there, at Mount
Pleasant.

I pursued my weary way, on horseback, to Chicago, through swamps,
over sand ridges, fighting mosquitoes, fleas, gnats and bedbugs. I
used to think in those days that the region between Michigan City and
Chicago was abandoned in disgust ere it was half finished. And the few
inhabitants on the route were on a par with the country. They lived
in a wretched manner, in log cabins on sand ridges, surrounded by
swamps and stagnant pools. Since then, railroads have improved the
country and the people. Spent three weeks in Chicago, and preached
three Sabbaths in an old court-house to large congregations. Chicago
then contained about five thousand inhabitants, and was rather a
hard looking place. There were no bridges across the river, no paved
streets, no railroads, and but little business was done, and its
citizens did not dream of the splendid career that was awaiting their
humble town. I found some zealous friends of our cause, but there was
no organization, and they had never held regular meetings. While I was
there, I visited most of the Universalist families, and was urged to
settle in Chicago, but I told my friends that it was my mission “to go
into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.”

Leaving Chicago, I turned my horse towards Cincinnati, and passed
through Logansport, Lafayette, and Indianapolis. I would ride all day
and deliver a long discourse at night. Returned to Cincinnati the last
of December, after an absence of six months; and during that time I had
traveled twelve hundred miles--all on horseback--delivered one hundred
and ten discourses, and received for compensation, one hundred and
fifty dollars.




CHAPTER V.


  JOURNEY IN OHIO--INTEMPERANCE--GENERAL BALDWIN--IN COLUMBUS--DEATH
  PENALTY--HOW TO DEAL WITH OFFENDERS--PREACH IN NEWARK AND
  ZANESVILLE--HELL DISCUSSED--MRS. FRANCES GAGE--INVITED TO SETTLE IN
  MARIETTA--W. H. JOLLY--IN CHILLICOTHE--OPPOSITION IN RICHMOND-- --.
  WEBBER--IN KENTUCKY--DR. CHAMBERLIN--OPPOSITION IN LEXINGTON--IS
  UNIVERSALISM INFIDELITY?--A SLANDEROUS STORY BY A D.D.--IN
  PARIS--EXCURSION TO PATRIOT--A DISCUSSION--DANIEL PARKER--CURE THE
  AGUE--GOOD HEALTH.

In a few days I commenced a journey through Ohio on my ever faithful
horse. Lectured in Mason on temperance. I have seen the blasting
effects of rum drinking, but neither my body or my soul was ever
polluted by a glass of distilled liquor. Cannot distinguish the
different kinds of spirits, and have no inclination to know more
about them. Rum selling, and rum drinking, are abominations that
make desolate the hearts and homes of multitudes; and it is amazing
that sensible men will rush headlong to destruction with the bottle
in their hands and their eyes wide open. The guilty parties in this
wretched business are, 1st, The manufacturers; 2d, The sellers; 3d,
The drinkers; 4th, The authorities that license the traffic; 5th, The
communities who empower the authorities to license. Most of the people
are guilty, and all suffer more or less, directly or indirectly. But
let the friends of temperance labor in season and out of season, to
reform the people, and banish the curse from the land. Their noble work
will not be in vain; God will crown it with success. I also delivered
several sermons near Edwardsville. General Baldwin resided near
there--a reliable friend of liberal principles. He was an intelligent
and influential man, and devoted to our cause. He was one of the first
to make an effort to establish Universalism in Southern Ohio. Although
a layman he often spoke in public in its defense. Subsequently he moved
to Illinois; but he carried his religion and zeal with him. He died
full of years, and went down to an honored grave.

Spoke in Columbus on religion, and delivered a discourse against the
death penalty. Universalism repudiates the taking of life. It is
wrong for an individual to kill a man; it is wrong for a state to
kill a man. But taking of life may sometimes be justifiable. Is this
a contradiction? A wretch enters my house at midnight, and attempts
to murder my family. Either he must be disabled, or he will kill the
whole household. In attempting to disable him I take his life. Am I
not justified, although I have violated the command, “Thou shalt not
kill?” An army marches through the land, and takes provisions for man
and beast, without permission of the owners. Are they not justified,
although they have violated the command, “Thou shalt not steal?” A
vessel enters a port laden with food; the inhabitants are starving, but
the owner refuses to sell or give to the starving citizens. Are they
not justified in helping themselves, although in doing so they commit
theft? They must either steal or die; and of the two evils they choose
the least. It is wrong to steal, but it is a greater wrong to die if
one can avoid it. So it is wrong to kill a man, but a greater wrong is
committed when an assassin kills an innocent man. But when a murderer
is in custody, the safety of no one requires that his life shall be
taken. Put him in prison, and keep him there till he becomes a safe man
in the community, and if he never reforms, keep him there for life.

The world’s mode of dealing with offenders is radically wrong; there
is too much of the leaven of revenge in it. They should be treated as
morally insane, rather than as criminals. Our penitentiaries should be
converted into moral reform schools, and transgressors should be put
there, and retained there, till well qualified persons, who scrutinize
their conduct every day, pronounce them regenerated. And he, who may
be sent there for stealing one dollar, should remain there till he is
no longer a thief, and if he resists all efforts to reform him, keep
him there as long as he lives. It is better for him, and for society,
that he should be thus excluded from the world. Man has no right to
_punish_ his brother man; God has established laws, and if they are
violated punishment is sure to follow; and it is our duty to reform the
erring. This mode of treatment accords with the gospel, and the spirit
of Christ, but the penitentiary, the gallows, and the guillotine,
correspond with the spirit of Orthodoxy.

When a great crime is committed our blood boils, and we cry aloud for
vengeance; but a little correct reflection on such occasions will do
us no harm. The criminal inherited a bad moral organization, and was,
perhaps, surrounded by evil associates from the cradle to manhood. All
this should be considered in dealing with the fallen; but the law of
man sees it not, considers it not. He is deemed equally as blamable as
his associate in crime, who was brought up under the most favorable
circumstances. But there is a great difference between the criminality
of the two. The latter sins against much more light than the former,
and is a greater criminal in the sight of God. Most of offenders come
into this world “half made up,” and are educated in crime from infancy
upward. Let the state take them under its special care and keeping;
protect society from their depredations, and strive to make better men
and women of such unfortunates.

Preached in Newark and Zanesville. In the former place a preacher
deemed it his duty to oppose me, but he did it in a very gentlemanly
manner. The subject of my discourse was _hell_, and the following was
the gist of it: 1st. The Bible no where asserts that hell is beyond the
grave, and in the immortal world. On the contrary, it teaches that it
is on the earth. The lawgiver, Moses, locates it here. “For a fire is
kindled in my wrath, and shall burn unto the _lowest hell_, and shall
consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of
the mountains. I will heap mischief upon them; I will spend my arrows
upon them. They shall be burned with hunger, and devoured with burning
heat, and with bitter destruction; I will also send the teeth of beasts
upon them, with the poison of serpents of the dust. The sword without,
and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin,
the suckling also with the man of gray hairs. I said, I would scatter
them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from
among men. To me belongeth vengeance and recompense; their foot shall
slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the
things that shall come upon them make haste.” Moses here tells his
countrymen what would be the consequences if they should be unfaithful
to the trust committed to them. The Lord would “hide his face from
them,” “vengeance would overtake them,” “the day of their calamity
would be at hand,” “they would be scattered into all parts of the
earth,” “the sword without and terror within would destroy them,” they
would be “burnt with hunger.” All these calamities are expressed by
the words, “_lowest hell_;” and the history of that remarkable nation
shows that the prophecy has been fulfilled. That nation has been cast
down to the lowest hell. David testifies that the results of sin are
not far off. “The pains of hell _got hold_ of me; I _found trouble_ and
_sorrow_.” Jesus said to the scribes and Pharisees, “Ye serpents, ye
generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell.” Matt.
xxiii. 33. And then he adds, “All these things shall come upon _this
generation_.” 2d. Hell is no where in the Bible said to be endless;
and who has a right to assume that it is endless in duration? Popes,
bishops and councils have threatened the world with endless torment,
if it did not bow to their yoke, but thank God our destiny is not in
their hands. 3d. We have no information of the creation of such a
place as Orthodoxy proclaims. We read of God creating the heavens and
the earth, and all therein, but not a word about his building a vast
prison in which to torment countless millions of his creatures world
without end. It is blasphemy to charge the God of love with such work.
God is good, and all his works are good. When creation was finished all
things were pronounced _good_. An eternal hell then is no part of God’s
work. Let this be remembered. 4th. The New Testament never speaks of
any one being saved from hell. It was the mission of Jesus to save us
from _sin_, from _darkness_, from a _lost condition_, from _slavery_,
from the _present evil world_, but there is not an intimation in the
New Testament that God sent his Son to save us from a hell of his own
creating. 5th. The word hell in the Bible does not signify, according
to good authority, a place of ceaseless woe. Dr. Adam Clarke, the
well known commentator, says: “The word _hell_, used in the common
translation, conveys _now_ an improper meaning of the original word;
because _hell_ is only used to signify the place of the damned. But
as the word _hell_ comes from the Anglo-Saxon _helan_, to _cover_,
to _hide_, hence the _tyling_ or _slating_ of a house is called, in
some parts of England, (particularly Cornwall,) _heling_, to this day;
and the _covers of books_, (in Lancashire,) by the same name.” This
admission is fatal to the common received views of hell. 6th. The word
hell in the Old Testament, is taken from the Hebrew term _sheol_, and
learned men of all schools admit, that it signifies the state of the
dead in general, without regard to their condition. Dr. George Campbell
remarks as follows: “_Sheol_ in itself considered, has no connection
with future punishment.” Dr. Whitby, a profound English scholar tells
us, that “_Sheol_ throughout the Old Testament signifies not a place
of punishment, or of the souls of bad men only, but the grave only, or
the place of the dead.” Other critics admit the same. 7th. In the New
Testament, the word hell is translated from the Greek term _hades_, and
as that is the Greek rendering of the Hebrew _sheol_, its meaning is
the same as its corresponding word. Hence Dr. Campbell says, “_Hades_
occurs eleven times in the New Testament, and is rendered grave once,
and hell ten times. In my judgment, it ought never in Scripture to be
rendered hell, at least in the sense wherein that word is universally
understood by Christians. In the Old Testament the corresponding word
is _sheol_, which signifies the state of the dead in general, without
regard to the goodness or badness of the persons, their happiness or
misery. It is very plain that neither in the Septuagint version of
the Old Testament, nor in the New, does the word _hades_ convey the
meaning which the present English word hell, in the Christian usage,
always conveys to our minds. The attempt to illustrate this would be
unnecessary, as it is hardly now pretended by any critic that this is
the acception of the term in the Old Testament.” 8th. The word hell in
the New Testament in twelve instances, is taken from the Greek term
_gehenna_, and Orthodox scholars thus define that word: “_Gehenna_ is a
Hebrew word denoting a place near Jerusalem, in which the Israelites,
giving themselves up to idolatry, sacrificed children to a heated image
of Moloch, which represented the form of an ox. This place, the valley
of Hinnom, the Jews afterwards so detested, that they were accustomed
to cast into it the unburied carcasses of those whom they desired
to punish with unusual severity. It is called a _gehenna of fire_,
because Josiah, in order to render the valley of Hinnom more odious,
commanded that filth and dead carcasses should be cast into it; for
the burning of which there was kept a perpetual fire.” 2 Kings xxiii.
10, et seq. This is the testimony of Dr. Rosenmuller, and it is the
testimony of all the learned, belong to what denomination they may.
This is the literal meaning of the word, twelve times rendered hell in
the New Testament. Figuratively, it refers to the temporal desolation
that was soon to befall the Jewish nation. The damnation of _gehenna_
overwhelmed Jerusalem, the whole land, and the people. Jesus told his
countrymen that they had filled up the measure of their iniquity, that
the vials of wrath and fiery indignation were about to be poured upon
them, that on them would come all the righteous blood their nation had
spilt. When these things shall come to pass, said Jesus, “there shall
be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world
to this time.” He told them over and over, that all these things would
come on that generation. Theologians now locate all that in yonder
world. They might as well assert, that the Ohio valley is the name of
a place beyond the grave, and the destruction that befell the Indians
therein is immortal woe in a _post mortem_ hell.

The gentleman said I was partly right and partly wrong. I met him
several years after, and he was then preaching the _annihilation_ of
the wicked. He had made some progress, for it is certainly better
to burn men to ashes than to burn them forever. I lectured in
McConnersville, and became acquainted with Mrs. Frances Gage, who
since then has been before the public as a writer and lecturer on
temperance and woman’s rights. Notwithstanding her limited education,
she writes good poetry and prose, and is a superior lecturer. She is
a noble woman, and devotes her life to noble purposes. Spent several
days in Marietta, a beautiful town on the Ohio river. I was urged to
remain there, and the society offered me five hundred dollars per year,
a liberal salary for the times, but I declined. I was fearful that
I could not sustain myself in preaching at one place all the time.
The friends there had no idea but I could, but I fancied that I knew
myself better than they did. Preached in Belpre. Stopped with General
Putnam, a descendent of the revolutionary hero of that name--a splendid
man, and a devoted believer in the restitution of all things. Here
I also met with W. H. Jolly, an early pioneer preacher. He traveled
most of the time through the wilderness of Ohio, preaching in private
houses, school-houses, barns, and wherever he could have a hearing.
He received but a small compensation, his whole soul was in the work,
and he was dearly beloved by his fellow believers. He died soon after
I saw him, but he is still remembered as a devoted and good man. He
had a daughter, a young lady, who wrote well for our periodicals. She
afterwards married, and I do not know what has become of her.

I preached in Richmond and Chillicothe. In the former place the
meetings caused considerable excitement, which brought out a preacher
against me. He abused me, my faith, and every body that entertained
it. He was a regular blackguard, and a son of thunder. My clothes
being rather seedy, the friends, as a compensation for my labor,
presented me with a new suit, and I went on my way rejoicing. A
clergyman of the liberal faith, by the name of Wood, resided and
preached in Richmond. He, however, soon after left there, moved to
Patriot, Ind., ceased to preach, was, for one or two sessions, a member
of the Indiana Legislature, and finally died insane. He was a worthy
man, but was too easily discouraged to be a minister in the West in
those days. Delivered lectures in several places in Highland county.
Became acquainted with a brother by the name of Webber, who soon after
commenced preaching. After laboring about ten years in Ohio, he moved
to Scotland county, Mo., where he died, after traveling and preaching
in that state two or three years. His lone grave is on the wide and
wild prairie. The last time I saw it a frail fence enclosed his resting
place, and that, ere this, has probably disappeared.

I returned to Cincinnati May, 1839. Had been absent five months,
delivered ninety-three discourses, and traveled six hundred miles.
The succeeding nine months were spent in Ohio, Indiana and Kentucky.
Delivered a series of discourses in Warsaw, Ky., which awakened much
interest. Dr. Chamberlin, a wealthy and influential citizen of that
place, had recently embraced the better faith. He had been a member
of the Campbellite church, and all who knew him, freely admitted that
his new faith had made a new man of him. It expanded his soul, and
opened his hand and his purse. His wealth, time and talent, and the
latter was of a superior order, were devoted to the upbuilding of
the truth. He distributed hundreds of volumes of our denominational
books through Kentucky, and was ever ready to aid every effort to
advance the good cause. He subsequently moved to Burlington, Iowa,
donated to every Universalist society in Iowa one hundred and sixty
acres of land, and, I think, gave the Lombard College, in Galesburg,
Ill., ten thousand dollars in cash, besides many valuable books and a
collection of American antiquities. Lectured three times in Lexington,
Ky. One of the ministers in town delivered a philippic against the new
faith; said Universalism was a species of infidelity. I asked, what
is there infidel about it? It asserts, that there a God, who rules in
heaven and on earth, and in who we live, move and have our being. Is
that infidelity? It teaches that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and
Savior of the world. Is that infidelity? It declares that God will
surely and fully reward every virtue, and surely and fully punish
every vice. Is that infidelity? It proclaims that man is an immortal
being, and destined to advance onward and upward forever and ever.
Is that infidelity? It asserts, that our greatest happiness consists
in communing with God, and leading a pure and virtuous life. Is that
infidelity? Portions of your system, sir, are worse than infidelity.
You are a Calvinist, and in the language of John Wesley, “You may call
me an infidel, a Turk, a Mahomedan, but don’t call me a Calvinist. I
had rather believe in no God than believe he is an _almighty tyrant_.”
You believe in a burning hell in which God will plunge most of the
dead, to be his victims eternally. Is there any thing in the baldest
infidelity half as infernal as that? You believe that God creates
us all totally depraved, not capable of thinking a good thought or
performing a good act, and if we do not change our nature, he will
roast us in hell forever. And then to cap the climax of infamy, you
teach that God decreed from all eternity, that the victims of perdition
should be born totally depraved, should live a wicked life, and in the
end should fall into the bottomless pit. If your creed is _religion_,
give me _infidelity_. To exchange the latter for the former, would be
exchanging heaven for hell.

I also lectured several times near Lexington, at the request of a
venerable man by the name of Taylor, a relative of President Taylor.
Several years after, I heard Dr. Young, a Methodist minister, tell the
following story in his pulpit at St. Louis, about Mr. Taylor and an
imaginary clergyman: “There lived an old and rich man near Lexington,
Ky., by the name of Taylor, who was a Universalist. Some time since,
he sent to Cincinnati for a preacher of his choice to come and preach
for him, and the preacher having performed his labor, Mr. T. paid him
one hundred dollars. All right; preachers should be paid for their work
like other folks. Some time after, the preacher visited him again, by
Mr. T.’s request, and he again paid him one hundred dollars. He did
right,” added Dr. Young. “When the preacher was about departing, he
told the old man he needed five hundred dollars, and would be much
obliged if Mr. Taylor would lend him that sum for a short time. He lent
it to him, and to this day the debt has not been cancelled. The old man
renounced his Universalism, and died a Methodist. If any of you doubt
the truth of this story, I tell you it is as true as the gospel, for I
know all about it.” I called on the gentleman the next day and asked
him if he was acquainted with Mr. Taylor.

“No.”

“Do you know any of his relatives?”

“No.”

“But you said yesterday that you knew all about this matter.”

“Brother Kavanagh told it to me, and he learned it from a brother in
Kentucky.”

“Now, sir, I knew Mr. Taylor, and I suppose that I am the preacher you
referred to, and I pronounce the whole story, save that Mr. T. was a
Universalist, and that I preached in his neighborhood, _false_.”

“Oh, this took place a _long time ago, before your day_.”

I took occasion to lecture him for telling slanderous tales about the
living or the dead on mere hearsay. Mr. Taylor took me to Richmond,
where I spoke twice. Two men came to me at the close of one of the
meetings; their hearts were full. They thanked God that the scales had
fallen from their eyes, and that they beheld the gospel in all its
heavenly beauty. I also preached in Paris, Flemingsburg, and many
other places in Kentucky. In one place, I remember that in the middle
of a sermon I had a hard ague chill, and had to stop half an hour, when
I resumed my discourse.

The new meeting-house in Patriot, Ind., was to be dedicated, and
a large party of Cincinnatians employed a boat to take them down
and back. It was a delightful excursion. We had music and dancing,
talking and promenading. George Rogers and E. M. Pingree were of the
party--both are now in heaven, I trust. We three did the preaching. J.
L. Johnson was installed pastor of the church. He had been a Methodist,
his faith was now enlarged, but he retained many of his old notions,
and all his Orthodox phraseology, and consequently he had poor success.
He soon left us and returned to his mother church. About this time I
attended a discussion in New Richmond, Ohio, between Robert Smith, and
a Mr. Fisher, a Methodist layman. Mr. F. was an able man, and better
qualified to defend his cause than three fourths of the preachers of
his order. Both being strong men, the discussion was very interesting.
Daniel Parker resided there, and had long been in the ministry.
He called himself a Restorationist, and would not associate with
Universalists. I suppose his views corresponded with those of Elhanan
Winchester. He was a disorganizer, would not form societies, but was
a very sincere, devout and good man. He preached one evening, and in
the midst of his sermon he buried his face in his hands, and wept like
a child. I recollect that he said in his sermon, that he had never
believed in Universalism one minute in all his life. In his old age, I
have understood, he joined the Baptist church.

My health continued feeble, not having recovered from the ague
engendered in the South, but it did not confine me in-doors a day. I
had a slight chill every day, succeeded by an inward fever, which kept
me in a debilitated condition. Occasionally though I had a violent
_shake_. Often when riding, I would have an attack of the ague, when I
would stop two or three hours, and then resume my journey. I took all
sorts of medicines, but nothing did me any good. It finally occurred
to me that breakfast might have some connection with my ague, as it
returned every morning soon after eating. I refrained from partaking
of breakfast for a week, and the ague did not trouble me. Two or
three times afterwards my morning ague returned, but abstaining from
breakfast always prevented a relapse. I was soon entirely free from it,
and since then, with the exception of two attacks of bilious fever, one
in St. Louis, and one in Chicago, brought on in both cases by walking
and riding in the blazing sun, and preaching too much, I have enjoyed
perfect health. I certainly have reason to be thankful for the good
health I have enjoyed, and for innumerable other blessings, temporal
and spiritual.




CHAPTER VI.


  A JOURNEY EAST--TALK WITH A BAPTIST MINISTER--PREACHED IN DELAWARE
  AND CENTERVILLE, OHIO--W. Y. EMMETT--DOORS CLOSED--A. BOND--A. B.
  GROSH--IN NEW ENGLAND--ON THE SEA--A STORM--METHODIST PREACHER
  FRIGHTENED--BLOW THE TRUMPET--IN PHILADELPHIA--IN DELAWARE--IN
  PITTSBURG--RETURNED TO CINCINNATI--GO TO CHICAGO--BAD ROADS--IN
  RICHMOND--TALK WITH A QUAKER--A SPIRIT RETURNS TO EARTH--A SPIRIT
  OUT OF THE BODY--A STRANGE SIGHT--PREACH IN GOD’S TEMPLE--PREACH IN
  CHICAGO--PREACH IN JOLIET--AARON KINNEY, AN EARLY PREACHER--BILL
  OF FARE--HARD LUCK IN MAGNOLIA--WHY PREACH--IN HENNEPIN--POLITICAL
  HUMBUGS--OPPOSITION IN WASHINGTON--JUSTICE OF GOD--IN PEKIN AND
  TREMONT--FROZEN--A PREACHER REPLIES.

George Rogers had traveled in the Southern states, and was urged either
to return or send some one to preach to the people. He could not go,
and at his solicitation, I consented to journey in Kentucky, Tennessee,
Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, North and South Carolina; and from
thence I purposed going by sea to Boston, Mass. February, 1840, with
horse and buggy, I started from Cincinnati on what I expected would be
a long and hard journey, through a thinly settled region, and among
strangers. Crossed the Ohio river, and traveled about ten miles on a
splendid pike. But at the end of the pike the sublime and ridiculous
joined hands. Horse and buggy plunged from the hard, dry and smooth
road into an ocean of mud and water. This enlightened me concerning
the condition of the roads generally, and after floundering in the
mud awhile, I succeeded in getting back to dry land, and returned to
Cincinnati, and abandoned my contemplated southern journey.

I then resolved to go East through Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York and
Massachusetts, and in a few days after I recrossed the Ohio river, I
was on my way, on horseback, to the noted city of Boston. I performed
the whole journey, about one thousand miles, on horseback, and it
occupied six weeks. I went East to visit my mother, and hurried through
as fast as possible. But I could not travel very fast, as the roads
were in a bad condition, and the weather was often stormy. Preached
in Woodstock, to large assemblies. Spent three days very pleasantly
in visiting kind friends, and in talking to the people. A society was
subsequently formed and a meeting-house erected. Cyrus F. Wait, then
a youth, attended my meetings. He soon after commenced preaching, and
labored faithfully in the ministry till 1865, when he laid down his
armor and ascended to his God. He lived and labored in Woodstock most
of the time he was in the ministry, was an efficient preacher and an
excellent man. I delivered several sermons in Delaware, and had the
following conversation with a Baptist clergyman:

“You preached in town last night, did you?”

“Yes.”

“If you are right, I cannot be wrong.”

“If I am right in my religious views, you are radically wrong in yours,
for I expect we essentially differ. If my views of God, Christ, heaven,
hell, man, rewards and punishments, are correct, you are in error, of
course, wherein you differ from me. Any one with half an eye, and that
nearly out, can see that.”

“Well, I am safe if Universalism is true.”

“You are in a lost condition if it is true. He only is safe whose
life is in harmony with the truth. Your mind, I perceive, from your
conversation, is darkened by a false theology. ‘Know the truth,’ said
Jesus, ‘and the truth shall make you free.’ ‘Sanctify them through
thy truth, thy word is truth.’ Jesus attached great importance to
receiving the truth. You are walking in darkness, and see that you do
not stumble. Truth is a lamp to the feet, and a guide to the soul. We
cannot walk safely without that light.”

“But I shall be saved as well as you if Universalism is of God.”

“You will be saved when your soul shall be sanctified by the truth, and
not till then. Universalism promises no salvation, in this world or the
world to come, without purity of heart. Let that be remembered.”

“But I thought you believed we should all be saved any how.”

“You thought wrong. There is only one way to be saved, and that is,
by having our souls baptized with the truth. Those thus baptized _are
saved_, heaven now reigns in their souls, the kingdom of God, which is
righteousness, joy and peace in the Holy Spirit, is _within them_. That
is the salvation Jesus lived, labored and died to bless man with.”

Delivered a discourse in Circleville, and formed the acquaintance of W.
Y. Emmett. He has long been known in Ohio as a faithful minister of the
New Testament. His father was a Methodist clergyman, but the son has
greatly improved on the theology of the father. There are three steps
from extreme error, in religion, to truth--Calvinism, Arminianism,
Universalism. Perhaps Br. Emmett’s grand-father was a Calvinist.
Passing on, I lectured several times in Ashtabula, but sectarianism
taking alarm, all doors were closed against me, and I proceeded to
Conneautville. Ammi Bond resided there. He has recently died. His
ministry was confined, chiefly, to the northeast part of Ohio, and
to contiguous portions of Pennsylvania. His personal appearance was
attractive; had a well formed head, a Grecian face, and the soul within
corresponded with the outer man. From here I proceeded more rapidly
on my journey. Called on A. B. Grosh, Utica, N. Y., who was then
publishing _The Gospel Advocate_. He possesses fine ability, and is,
every way, a noble man. Crossed the Hudson river, at Troy, and after
six weeks traveling reached Princeton, Mass., where my mother resided.
Visited my old home in Haverhill, and shed a tear over my brother’s
grave in Plaistow, N. H., attended a Conference meeting in Boston,
and then sailed from Boston for Philadelphia, in the brig Mary Ann,
commanded by Captain Chase. We encountered a tremendous storm--an
equinoctial storm--which made the vessel roll and plunge at a fearful
rate, and set the sailors to telling stories of shipwrecks, ghosts,
and home. The captain, who was a member of one of our societies on
Cape Cod, related the following of a Methodist preacher:--The previous
season there was a terrible storm off that coast, and many vessels were
lost. A friend of his, who ran a vessel between New York and Boston,
was out in it, and during the hardest of the gale, in a pitch-black
night, he was trying to weather Cape Cod, to get into a sheltered
position. He had a Methodist preacher on board. About midnight, when
it was dark as Egypt, the wind howling, the waves dashing, and the
vessel plunging, he went into the cabin dripping with salt water, when
the preacher said, “Captain, how are we getting along?” The captain
replied, “We are drifting towards the shore very fast, and we shall all
be in heaven before morning.” “God _forbid_,” said the clergyman. This
reminds me of a courageous preacher in Indiana. Some boatmen, after
toiling all night in a flat-boat on White river, tied up their craft,
and sought a place to rest. They selected a barn for that purpose. Over
its floor was a scaffold covered with hay, on which they laid their
weary bodies to repose. Being much fatigued they slept sound and long.
When they awoke, they found that there was a congregation worshiping
on the floor below, for it was Sunday morning. The preacher was in the
midst of his theme--the judgment day, that day for which all days
were made. He had got to where the saints were about to be raised, and
he, of course, was one of them. “O-ah,” said he, “I want to go-ah; I
am tired-ah of this wicked-ah world-ah;” and looking straight at the
roof of the barn, he cried as loud as he could scream, “Gabriel-ah,
Gabriel-ah, blow-ah that trumpet-ah, that I-ah may leave-ah this
ungodly-ah world-ah, and go to heaven-ah. I-ah say-ah, Gabriel-ah,
blow-ah that-ah trumpet-ah this-ah minute-ah.” The boatmen had a tin
horn, and one gave a loud blast, which made every worshiper bound to
his feet. The preacher stopped short, cast one agonizing glance upward,
and then leaped through and over his flock out of the barn, and ran
home as fast as his legs would carry him. One old lady, in her haste to
get out of the way of Gabriel, broke a limb.

In Philadelphia I was introduced to Asher Moore, a well known minister
in the East. Z. Fuller, for many years an influential clergyman in that
city, had recently died. Being anxious to return to my western field of
labor, I tarried but a few hours in P. Proceeded over the mountains to
Pittsburg, by railroad and stage, where I delivered several discourses.
From thence I went in a steamboat to Cincinnati; and in a few days, was
on the road to Chicago.

A journey to Chicago from Cincinnati was not as easily, or as quickly
made in those days as it is now. Instead of a few hours, it took
about two weeks of hard traveling to perform the journey. Instead of
a smooth, iron road, it was about the roughest and softest road ever
traveled by man or beast. Parts of it were railway, but the rails were
unhewed logs, and laid across the track, which endangered the horse’s
legs and carriage wheels. Portions of the year it was hard to find the
bottom of the mud. It was indeed a rough and terrible road most of
the way through; and the driver had to keep both eyes open to avoid
stumps, holes and quagmires, and often with good eyes, and they used to
the best advantage, he did not escape shipwreck. Preached in Richmond,
Ind., four times. This is a Quaker town. Had a long conversation with a
preacher of that order.

“You do not pray in public?”

“No; Christ enjoined secret prayer.”

“True; but he prayed in the presence of others, and on the cross prayed
in the presence of thousands, ‘Father, forgive them for they know not
what they do.’ The seventeenth chapter of John is a prayer uttered
in the presence of his disciples. The apostle Paul, on one occasion,
kneeled on the sea shore in the midst of a large assembly, and vocally
invoked the divine blessing. And most of good men and good women in all
ages and in all climes, whether Christian or Pagan, have sanctioned
the practice. The tongue loves to speak what the heart feels, and
a prayer straight from the heart, often has more influence on an
assembly than a good sermon. Of course, it is a great sin to pray or
preach ‘to be seen of men,’ but praying and preaching with the spirit
and the understanding, are heaven-appointed means to christianize
the soul. There is, doubtless, much hypocritical praying as well as
preaching, but the abuse of a good thing is not a valid reason for its
abandonment. You oppose singing, I understand. Why do you?”

“The Friends in their worship are governed by the _spirit_, and singing
is an _art_, _taught_ and _learned_, hence they exclude it from their
worship.”

“Learning to _read_ is an _art_, and yet you read the Bible. Speaking
correctly is an _art_, but you cultivate correct speaking in your
meetings. The _spirit_ does not teach you how to read or how to speak.
Music is a science of which God is the author, and in studying music we
learn of the wisdom of God, and in singing we sing his praise. A good
hymn sung correctly is a sermon and a prayer; it unites the hearts of
all who hear, and stirs the soul to its depths. Why do you all wear the
same style of dress?”

“Because we abhor _fashions_.”

“But it seems to me that your people are great lovers of fashion. There
is a Quaker fashion, and you all, men, women and children, stick to
it through thick and thin. If one of your members deviates from your
fashion he is dealt with as an offender. You do not run after every
fashion, but you adopt the fashion of the times of Charles II., and
will make no improvement. I despise fashion more than you do, for I
consult my own taste, and not the frivolous whims of crack-brains in
the nineteenth or sixteenth century.”

A gentleman here told me a singular story. A physician and a lawyer
lived in Richmond; they were intimate friends, and spent much time
together. Both were zealous infidels, and they promised each other,
that the one that should die first, if he lived after death, would
return to his friend left on earth if he was able to do so. The
physician died, but the survivor thought not of the promise, for he was
sure death had spared nothing of his friend. Several months after the
physician’s death, the lawyer was astonished to see his departed friend
enter his office. He slowly approached the couch on which he was lying,
for it was night, and reminded him of their mutual promise; said he
had made several efforts before to visit him but failed; told him that
both of them were mistaken about death; that _the man_ did not die;
he only put off the body and entered on a higher sphere of existence,
and that most of mankind were in error concerning the second stage of
life, that being much more like this world than many imagined. After an
affectionate adieu, he disappeared, promising to return, if possible,
but he saw him no more. The gentleman related the circumstance to his
friends, and they, of course, laughed at him, and said he was crazy or
asleep, whereupon he went before a magistrate and testified under oath,
that what he related was strictly correct. He was ever after a believer
in immortality; he said he _knew_ there was a future life, for he had
seen one from the land beyond the vale.

A gentleman in Ohio related to me the following: He ran a flouring
mill, located at the foot of a hill, on the top of which was his
residence. His aged father often spent an hour or two in the mill. One
day he observed him enter the building, with staff in hand, and after
remaining a few minutes, walked out. Nothing was said by either party,
and several times they passed within three or four feet of each other.
Stepping to the door soon after the old gentleman went out, he saw
his father slowly ascending the hill to the house. He immediately had
occasion to go to the house, and not seeing his father, inquired for
him, and was informed that he was lying down. He went into his room and
found him asleep, and was told he had been on the bed a full hour.

Another intelligent friend related the following: His family and
another family occupied one house in an Ohio town--the former the
front, and the latter the rear part of the building, and a gate, two
feet from the front door, was the entrance to the rear of the house.
The gate swung hard on its hinges, and with much noise. About ten
at night, my informant, from his front door, observed a person on
the sidewalk approaching the house; having a peculiar appearance, he
requested his wife to step to the door and see who it was. To both he
seemed a stranger, and both remarked that he made no noise walking on
the stone pavement. When opposite the gate, and two feet from where
they were standing, he turned and passed through the gateway to the
rear of the building out of sight. Supposing the gate was open, as the
traveler did not stop to open it, the gentleman stepped aside to close
it, when, to his atonishment, he found it shut. On opening the gate
he found that it made as loud a report, and required as much effort
as usual. Not being able to account for all this, he inquired of his
neighbor if any one had called, and was answered, nay. That night a
woman in the rear part of the building died. It is quite fashionable
to cry humbug and delusion, when such stories are related; but I do
not raise that cry, neither have I a satisfactory explanation of them
to offer. The history and tradition of all nations and people are full
of what seems to be the supernatural; and if that part is all false,
how can we credit the balance of their history? But most people, after
all, have, at least, some vague impressions, that the departed have
something to do with the world they once inhabited. And why should they
not?

I had an appointment in a Methodist meeting-house in Washington;
and while the congregation was assembling, the pastor of the church
told us we could not occupy the house; such abominable sentiments
should not be promulgated in the Methodist meeting-house. I told the
congregation, as we were not allowed to occupy the Methodist house,
we would adjourn to the house of the Lord--a beautiful grove. This
being an unexpected reply, and part of the congregation being rather
pleased, the preacher good-naturedly said I might say what I pleased
in the Methodist house. Visited many places where I had before spoken,
and reached Chicago, August, 1840, where I preached three Sabbaths,
and then proceeded to Joliet. Lectured there three times. We have now
a society in that place, and a splendid meeting-house. Aaron Kinney
then resided in Joliet, and preached there and in the region round
about. He subsequently moved to Farmington, Ill., where he and his wife
died. He was one of the first ministers of our faith in Illinois, and
he labored under many disadvantages. Liberal Christians were few in
number, for the country was thinly populated, and he consequently was
poorly supported. But he persevered in the good work till death closed
his labors. Delivered one discourse in Peru, but did not find a soul
that sympathized with me. The congregation was large, but all seemed to
be afraid of me. I was informed of a friend, who resided a few miles
below on the canal, which was then being excavated. Spent one night
with him; and although he seemed to be a good kind of a man, he lived
like a hog. The bill of fare for the night was, 1st, A hot night; 2d,
A dirty bed; 3d, An army of bed-bugs; 4th, Ditto, fleas; 5th, Ditto,
musquitoes. I was glad to leave the dirty hole. Reached Magnolia in the
night; and after being refused lodging at half of the houses in the
village, a poor drunken man took me in. He treated me to the best his
cabin afforded, which was poor enough. Found some friends the next day,
and delivered several discourses before I left town. A preacher could
not let me pass without a hit.

“If this man,” said he, “is correct, he is a fool for traveling about
this new country preaching. If I believed as he does, I would never
preach again.”

“My friend,” I replied, “I preach the truth. 1st, Because it is the
truth; 2d, Because I love the truth; 3d, Because truth benefits man.
But you seem to have more regard for party than for truth. Anything
that is not found there you care nothing about, let it be ever so
valuable. You need to be baptized with the spirit of truth, for you
have been baptized only with the spirit of some party. Jesus, whom you
profess to follow, but really run away from, was an ardent lover of the
truth. He toiled, bled and died for the truth. He cared nothing about
party, but he was as true to the truth as the needle is to the pole. He
never varied from it one iota in the darkest hour of his life. When I
hear men talk as you have to-day, I know that they know nothing of the
spirit of Christ.”

Lectured in Hennipen several times. Dr. Pulsifer had recently moved
there from the East, and took much interest in getting up the meetings.
Have often been there since, and always found him to be a faithful
friend. I met here several families which had formerly resided in the
East, and were there regular attendants at the sanctuary, but had not
heard a discourse on the Restitution for several years; and it made
their hearts leap with joy to attend a meeting of their choice. “Thank
God,” said one lady, “for the blessed privilege of hearing the gospel
of our salvation once more, before I go hence. The Lord be with you;
and may you long live to proclaim the unsearchable riches of Christ to
fallen, sinful man.”

During this year was the noted presidential campaign, when General
Harrison and Martin Van Buren were candidates for the White House, and
the whole country was in an uproar. The air was vocal with “Tippecanoe
and Tyler too,” and log cabins, and cider barrels were moving in all
directions at the beat of the drum. The Democrats disdained such
humbuggery, and lost the day, but after that they were not a whit
behind the Whigs in all sorts of tomfoolery. Whisky, beer, and such
senseless exhibitions, often command more votes than a just cause. This
is a lamentable and humiliating fact, and the evil will continue till
intelligence and virtue are the ruling spirits of the land. Meeting a
boy eight or ten years old in the road one day, he cried, “Hurrah for
Harrison.” Wanting some amusement, I said, “You rascally tory!” “Well,
then,” said he, as quick as lightning, and jumping from the ground,
“hurrah for Dick Johnson and his black ones.” That was a poser for a
Democrat, for Richard M. Johnson, who was the candidate for the Vice
Presidency on the Democratic ticket, was the father of several darkies.
If that boy is living, he is doubtless now one of our stump orators. I
made no reply to the little politician, but left him alone in his glory.

Lectured in Washington. A preacher delivered a discourse against the
Great Salvation. His chief argument was based on what he termed “the
justice of God.” The justice of God requires the endless punishment
of the wicked. Some of my remarks in reply were as follows: What
the preacher calls justice is injustice, is malignity, dark, cruel,
infernal malignity. Because frail, finite man, worm of the dust,
steps aside from the line of duty, and thereby harms himself, and no
one else, the Creator of heaven and earth must pounce upon him with
the wrath and vengeance of a thousand tigers, and pursue him from
the cradle to the grave, from the grave to the resurrection, from
the resurrection to the infernal regions, and there commission the
devil and all his crew to keep up the chase through the length and
depth of hell forever and ever. Why, justice would turn pale at such
injustice. But to make out that such cruelty is pure justice, the
preacher said that man violates an infinite law, and therefore justly
merits everlasting hell-torments. Then the transgression of any law of
God deserves endless woe. Breaking a bone, cutting the flesh, eating
improper food, are violations of God’s laws, and according to the
preacher, richly deserve ceaseless punishment. A child or a man steals
a pin; that is a violation of the divine law, and both merit eternal
suffering. If disobeying of God’s law merits infinite punishment, then
obeying of it merits infinite happiness. What then becomes of the
Bible doctrine that “eternal life is the GIFT of God?” Rom. vi. 23.
If the gentleman is correct, there are no degrees in crime, guilt or
punishment. There cannot be if every infringement of God’s law is an
infinite offense. He who steals a pin, and he who murders a man, commit
crimes of equal magnitude, and both are equally guilty, and deserve
equal punishment. If one sin merits infinite punishment, ten thousand
sins can merit no more, and God will punish a man for _one sin_ just as
long as he will for a _million_ of sins. All mankind sin, and therefore
all mankind deserve endless punishment. Who then can be saved, if the
preacher is right? But, said he, Jesus has made an atonement for the
sins of the world, has satisfied divine justice, and sinners can escape
the penalty due their crimes. How is that? The justice of God satisfied
with the sacrifice of Christ? Did Jesus suffer the penalty man merits?
Did he suffer infinite misery, the few hours he was on the cross? Did
he suffer all the pain that all mankind deserve for breaking the law?
The preacher must reply, yes. If Jesus satisfied justice for the “sins
of the whole world, original and actual,” as his creed--the Methodist
creed--asserts, then will not all be saved? Is not God bound to save
all for whom Christ made an atonement? If the gentleman is correct--if
the law is infinite, if the penalty is infinite, if all deserve
endless hell-torments, and if Jesus has made “an atonement, a perfect
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, original and actual,” all
are bound to escape, and reach heaven.

But let the law of God be infinite or finite, man’s _guilt_ is in
proportion to his _knowledge_ of right and wrong. An idiot may kill
a man, but he is not guilty, for he knows no better. An intelligent
person would be deeply guilty for such a deed. Our guilt, then, and the
punishment we merit, are in exact ratio with our knowledge of right
and wrong. These facts upset the preacher’s whole theory of infinite
sin and punishment. Justice does not require so much pain for so much
sin. To demand that would be vengeance, retaliation, an eye for an
eye, a tooth for a tooth, just what Jesus condemns. Exercising justice
is giving all parties their due--restoring the equilibrium, making
the crooked straight, the rough smooth, causing all flesh to see the
salvation of God. It is not destruction, but restoration; it does not
hurl men from God, but draws them to him; it consigns us not to hell,
but exalts us to heaven. This view of justice harmonizes with the mercy
and goodness of God, and refutes the line of the poet, that

  “A God all mercy is a God unjust.”

Lectured in Pekin three times. We have now a good society and
meeting-house in this place. It was then a small village, now it is
a large town. Proceeded to Tremont, where I spent several days, and
lectured four times. At a subsequent visit to this place, I had an
appointment in Washington, twelve miles north, on a cold December
Sunday morning. The thermometer was below zero, the snow deep, and
the wind blowing hard from the north. Started on horseback, and was
soon very cold. I walked, ran, kicked, and thrashed my arms, but this
exercise fatigued me, and I remounted my horse, and soon became very
comfortable, and congratulated myself that I should get through without
further trouble. A hole being in one of my gloves, I noticed that one
of my fingers looked rather pale, and I was not long in discovering
that I was actually freezing. It was then two miles to a house, and
when I reached it I hesitated about stopping, I felt so comfortable.
I finally went into the house, and soon found that my fingers, ears,
nose, and face were badly frozen. Remained there till the next day, but
if I had not stopped, I should probably have frozen to death, as it was
several miles to a house, and across an open prairie.

Spoke again in Washington. The preacher I replied to a few days
before, was still howling about the abominations of Universalism, but
I said no more to him. Went to Bloomington, preached three times, and
got into a controversy. The preacher was a strong believer in water
baptism--contended that there was no salvation without it. I told him
that his creed damned nearly all mankind; that a person might love God
and his fellow men, like John, believe the whole gospel, like Paul,
repent of his sins, like Peter, but unless he was immersed in water, in
the name of Christ, he would be lost forever; if he was correct, heaven
would be almost empty, hell crowded; Christ redeem but a small portion
of mankind, while the devil would be crowned with nearly all. The wise
and benevolent Author of our being bases salvation on principles, not
on rites--not on going into water, eating wafers, drinking wine, or
offering incense. Love is the fulfilling of the law. God is love, his
will is love, his power is love, his spirit is love, his work is love,
his law is love, his gospel is love, and our whole duty is included
in love to God, and love to man. The great need of the world is, more
love, and less show and profession; more purity of the heart, and
less washing of the hands; more soul religion, and less materialistic
religion.

I proceeded to Urbana. Met a man hobbling along on one leg. He had
heard me preach somewhere, and abruptly said:

“If all are to be saved, what is the use of being religious?”

“I see you have only one leg. I suppose you would like to have two
sound limbs.”

“That I should. I would freely give my farm for a leg made of flesh and
bone, instead of this concern made of wood, iron and leather.”

“You remarked a moment since, that you hoped you were a Christian, and
expected to go to heaven when you left this world. Do you expect to be
a one-legged cripple in heaven?”

“Of course not; all will have perfect bodies there.”

“Well, then, what is the use of your troubling yourself about your
lameness in this world; you will be all right in heaven; you can hobble
out your three score years and ten, and then all be well with you.”

“But that is no reason why I should not have a sound body in this
world. I want to enjoy all the blessings I possibly can in this world.”

“My friend, you have answered your question. You want a whole limb
in this world, if you do expect one in the next. So, we should be
religious in this world if we do expect to partake of God’s blessing in
heaven, for a religious life only is a happy life, a heavenly life.”

I then proceeded to Perrysville, Ind., in the western part of the
state. This was the end of my journey, as I did not return to
Cincinnati. I had traveled full eight hundred miles since I left
Cincinnati, and delivered eighty-eight discourses.




CHAPTER VII.


  LOCATED IN LAFAYETTE--THE CHRISTIAN TEACHER COMMENCED--A
  CIRCUIT--SOCIETY ORGANIZED--MEETING-HOUSE BUILT--ALL ALONE--CONFLICT
  IN FRANKFORT--OLD TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF PUNISHMENT--DEBATE
  PROPOSED IN FRANKFORT--DISCUSSION IN INDEPENDENCE--CHARACTER OF MY
  SERMONS--SLANDERS REFUTED--DEBATE IN BURLINGTON--ENDLESS WOE--SOME
  VOTING--THE USE OF DISCUSSION--A TRAVELER.

A new era now commenced in my life. I made Lafayette, Ind., the center
of my operations, and commenced the publication of the _Christian
Teacher_, a monthly publication of twenty-four pages, at one dollar
per year. The first number was issued April, 1841. There were then
two other denominational publications in the West--the _Star in the
West_, a weekly, in Cincinnati, Ohio, and the _Philomath Encyclopedia_,
a monthly, in the eastern part of Indiana, the _Better Covenant_ and
the _New Covenant_ had no existence, and the _Glad Tidings_ and the
_Berean_ were discontinued. There was a large field for a publication
of that kind, and I thought it would do a good work. When the first
number was issued, I had two hundred subscribers, and at the close
of the first volume, eight hundred subscribers. I owned no printing
materials, but had the work done at the office of the Lafayette
_Journal_, published by Major Seaman, a zealous Methodist, and an
honorable man. He has been in his grave these many years.

In addition to getting out the magazine, I traveled extensively this
year, preaching, and obtaining subscribers for the journal. Wherever
I went I had no difficulty in introducing it, humble and imperfect as
it certainly was. But I was not able to make many such long journeys
as I had heretofore, for I had to be in Lafayette monthly to read
proof and mail the _Teacher_. I also established a circuit which
I traveled monthly. It included Lafayette, Dayton, Yorktown, West
Point, Perrysville, Jefferson, Independence, Rainsville, Thorntown,
Crawfordsville, Ladoga, Terre Haute, Lockport, and perhaps two or
three other places. The distance round was about three hundred miles.
In Perrysville a society was organized this year, and a meeting-house
commenced. There was also one formed in Terre Haute, and preparations
made to erect a house of worship. In Lafayette, Dayton, and Yorktown,
there were also societies established. As I was the only minister in
western Indiana, where this work was going on, I had my hands full.

The first time I visited Frankfort, I preached in a vacant lot by the
way-side, as no house could be obtained. The Presbyterian clergyman,
Mr. Taylor, told his congregation that he had rather the cholera would
come to town than a preacher of my stamp. A few months after, he
attended one of my meetings, and replied to my discourse. My subject
was the Old Testament doctrine of punishment, and I discoursed as
follows:

1. As the Old Testament contains a record of God’s first revelations
to man, it is reasonable to expect, that the whole truth concerning
the consequences of wrong doing would be there clearly stated. 2. As
that book speaks of the creation of mankind, and of the introduction of
sin into the world, infinite wisdom must surely tell the whole truth
concerning sin’s direful results--tell when and where, punishment
is inflicted, and how long it is to continue. 3. The Old Testament
contains the law of God. Jesus said, “The law came by Moses.” Examine
the statutes of any state, published by its law-makers, and you will
find that the same page that contains the law also contains the
penalty, the whole penalty, for transgressing that law. Is this
right, or is it wrong? If it is right for human legislators to write
the law and the penalty in the same book, and on the same page, is
it not right for the Divine Legislator do the same? Would not a king
be justly deemed a fool, or a tyrant, who, in publishing his laws to
his subjects, should be silent concerning the penalty, or make known
only a part of it? Has God revealed the moral law, and is he silent
concerning the penalty for transgressing that law? Is man wiser than
God? Does the wisdom of earth exceed that of heaven? All admit, that
part, at least, of sin’s penalty is revealed in the Law Book, but many
deny that the whole of it is therein revealed. But why this partial
revelation? Why was the world for four thousand years in the dark
concerning the penalty of sin? For the forty centuries before Christ,
was a vast stream of human beings plunging headlong into a bottomless
pit, and not a warning given of their impending fate, till they heard
the stunning roar of the infernal cataract? This is affirmed by many
learned divines. They admit that the Old Testament does not teach
eternal punishment, but at the same time they contend, that from Adam
to Christ, the penalty for transgression was eternal punishment, and
consequently all nations and people were during that time exposed to
that terrible storm of wrath. Away with such blasphemous imputations.
Wisdom, goodness, justice, assure us, that the great Lawgiver kept
nought back of sin’s penalty, but revealed the truth, the whole truth,
and at the same time he gave the law. And here it is in such plain
language that a child can understand it. I will read from Deuteronomy
xxviii.:

“It shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the
Lord thy God, to observe to do _all his_ commandments and statutes
which I command thee this day, that _all these curses_ shall come
upon thee, and overtake thee: Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and
cursed shalt thou be in the field. Cursed shall be thy basket and thy
store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
land, the increase of thy cattle, and the flocks of thy sheep. Cursed
shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou
goest out. The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation and rebuke
in all that thou settest thine hand unto to do.... He shall smite thee
with consumption, and with a fever, with blasting and mildew; and the
Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, _until he shall have
consumed thee from off the land whither thou goest to possess it_.”

“Moreover, all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue
thee till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkendst not unto the
voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes,
which he commanded thee. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God
with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all
things, therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the Lord shall
send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and
in want of all things. And thine enemy shall besiege thee in all thy
gates, until thy high and fenced walls shall come down, wherein thou
trustedest. Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not
enjoy them; for they shall go into captivity. And thou shalt become an
astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations whither the
Lord shall lead thee.”

This language cannot be misunderstood. No lawgiver ever stated the
penalty for transgression in plainer terms. The Jews, if they sinned,
were to suffer in body and mind, in head and heart, at home and
abroad, till they were consumed from the land. But _beyond the land_
there is not an intimation that endless woe would be their doom. That
the apostle Paul understood the consequences of sin to be temporal,
is evident from these words, “For if the words spoken by angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience _received_ a just
recompense of reward; how shall we escape if we neglect so great a
salvation?” Heb. ii. 23. The apostle here speaks of _past wickedness_,
and says it HAD RECEIVED A JUST RECOMPENSE OF REWARD, and the countless
millions of the dead consequently were not TO BE receiving it through
the ceaseless ages of eternity. They had received a just recompense of
reward, and were at rest. All the moral elements of the law are as much
in force to-day as they were when they were revealed to Moses, and the
penalty is the same now as it was then. Good men are blessed _now_, and
wicked men are cursed _now_. Goodness blesses the one, and vice curses
the other. It is as true now of all who have lived, that they _have_
received a just recompense of reward, as it was in St. Paul’s day and
generation. The Old Testament, from beginning to end, reiterates the
same lesson concerning the present blasting effects of vice in all its
varied forms.

Mr. Taylor, in reply, admitted that the Old Testament teaches, that the
wicked in _part_ are punished in this world, that they have a foretaste
of hell this side of the grave, a morsel of what is in reservation
for them beyond the tomb. He also admitted, that Moses did not teach
endless punishment, but the prophets did teach it, though not in as
clear language as did Christ and the apostles. A future life was only
partially revealed during the Law Dispensation; it was reserved for
the Son of God to fully bring life and immortality to light. So with
regard to hell; it was obscurely revealed by the prophets, but clearly
revealed by the Savior of man.

I rejoined thus: “Hell obscurely revealed by the prophets!” And yet,
Mr. Taylor tells us, that from Adam to Christ, multitudes were daily
dropping into the infernal regions. Hell should have been revealed
more distinctly than death or the grave, for it might have been
shunned if timely warning had been given. Only think of a God of love
imparting existence to human beings, knowing, that by day and by night,
from the cradle to the grave, they were in imminent danger of falling
into a fathomless gulf, there ever to writhe in immortal agonies, and
having his omniscient eye on them during the whole of their earthly
pilgrimage--yet only OBSCURELY HINT to them of their danger. What kind
of a God, sir, do you worship? But then heaven, he says, was only
obscurely revealed under the law. I am amazed that a good, intelligent
and learned man should deceive himself by such sophistry. It may be
consistent for a parent in his last will and testament to withhold
knowledge of a great _good_ for a given period from his children,
but he must be a monster to withhold for a moment knowledge of an
_impending evil_, especially if he knows they may escape it by timely
warning.

It was nearly midnight when the discussion closed, and I spent the rest
of the night at his house, by his request. The next morning, he prayed
that I might be converted to the knowledge of the truth, and then
proposed a public discussion in Frankfort. The propositions were agreed
on, but the time was not specified, and I never could, subsequently,
induce him to name the date for the debate to commence. He put me off
from time to time, and finally the matter was dropped.

About this time, I had a discussion in Independence, Ind., with Mr.
Campbell, a Methodist minister, and that was my first regular oral
debate. I had often had _skirmishes_, but this was my first regular
pitched battle, and I went into it with much fear and trembling. I
had confidence in the _truth_, but feared I should fail in defending
it. And to this day, I never commence a discussion without similar
fears; but when I get excited, and have the measure of my man, I feel
tolerably bold. The subject of discussion was endless punishment. Mr.
Campbell was a Scotchman, and pretty wiry. The discussion elicited much
interest, and large assemblies listened to it. The following is the
substance of one of my speeches:

The consequences of sin were revealed to our first parents in the
following words: “And the Lord God took the man, and put him in the
garden of Eden to dress it, and to keep it. And the Lord God commanded
the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat,
but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of
it; for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” Gen. ii.
15-17. Here is the first commandment, and the first penalty, and we
may expect that a wise, just and merciful God would inform our race in
its very infancy, of the whole results of wickedness. If eternal woe
is the penalty, it should have been then and there, at the very gate
of Eden, proclaimed in distinct and unmistakable language. This the
welfare of man, in time and in eternity, required. If man’s everlasting
weal or woe depends on his choosing evil or good in this world, that
tremendous fact should have been announced in Eden in such thundering
tones, that its echo would reverberate down all the succeeding ages,
through every valley, across every plain, over every mountain, so that
all the living, yea, the dead, should hear it. If belief in endless woe
is the conservative of virtue, and the denial of it infidelity, that
dogma should have been proclaimed so loud and so distinct, it should
have been so stamped on every heart, that a blazing hell and terrible
devils, would have been the first thoughts of childhood, and not to be
forgotten till the eyes were closed in death, and the heart ceased to
beat.

But what saith the passage: “In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt
surely die.” Is that all the penalty? Every word of it. Not a syllable
about endless death, endless misery, endless hell. Mr. Campbell, who
authorized _you_ to put _endless_ before death? You _add_ to the
word of God, and you know what is said of those who do that wicked
thing. The punishment was that they should _die_. The Bible speaks of
national death, temporal death, death to sin, and death in sin. But
here it cannot mean national death, or death to sin; neither can it
mean temporal death, for Adam lived hundreds of years after he sinned.
Reference, without doubt, is to death in sin, a moral death--death
to purity, innocence, virtue, happiness, which is symbolized by his
being driven out of the garden. We were all in that garden once.
Jesus took little children in his arms and blessed them, saying: “Of
such is the kingdom of heaven.” But Adam was cast out, and most of us
share the same fate. Adam in Eden represents our childhood, and out
of it our sinful state. This death in sin, which Adam suffered, and
multitudes of others suffer, is often spoken of in the Bible. Said
Jesus, “Let the dead bury the dead;” that is, let the dead in sin bury
the temporally dead. “You hath he quickened who were dead in trespasses
and sin.... Even when we were dead in sin hath he quickened us together
with Christ.” Eph. ii. 1, 5. This moral death means a great deal. It
includes sin itself, and all its moral consequences--degradation,
debasement, condemnation, darkness, hell, and ultimates often in
temporal ruin. This soul-debasement results in jails, penitentiaries
and gallows; in slavery, war and tyranny; in premature graves,
desolated cities, and ruined nations.

But where and when was the penalty to be inflicted? Mark the words:
“IN THE DAY thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” Sin and its
penalty are bound--chained together. It does not read that they would
not be punished till the judgment day, thousands of years hence, at
the end of time. That is Mr. Campbell’s theory; but the truth is, that
sin and punishment go hand in hand, at all times, and in all places,
and if he can prove eternal sinning, I will prove eternal suffering.
Notice also, that the punishment was _sure_. In the day thou sinneth
thou shalt _surely_ die. If you jump into the sea, and cannot swim,
you must suffer the consequences; if you swallow a dose of poison,
and it penetrates your vitals, you must abide the result; so he who
transgresses the moral law of God, must suffer its blasting, damning
effects. “Ye _shall surely_ die.” Repentance may mitigate the result
in _part_, but the curse cleaves to the sinner till there is an entire
transformation of character. But the penalty is not _endless_, else
who can be saved from sin? It was not termed endless when it was first
revealed, neither is it called endless in any part of the Bible. The
gentleman will have to hunt up evidence outside of the book to make out
endless woe for the sins of this life.

Mr. Campbell replied: “That the death threatened Adam, was death
temporal, death spiritual, and death eternal; and although it was not
termed _eternal_ in the passage, it was clearly implied there, and
distinctly taught all through the Bible.”

I answered: Here are two assumptions. 1. That the death was threefold.
There is no such intimation in the passage or elsewhere in the Bible.
2. That the death is _eternal_. It is not so termed from Genesis to
Revelation.

But I have not room for more of that discussion. Mr. Campbell seemed
satisfied with his defense of ceaseless woe, and we parted in
friendship.

I got along better with this discussion than I expected, and was more
willing afterwards to engage in such debates. Many well meaning persons
oppose the public discussion of religious subjects; they think it does
no good, but much harm; but they do not properly discriminate between
the abuse and proper use of discussion. That it may be, and often
is abused, there can be no doubt; but what good thing can be named,
that is not liable to be abused? And it seems that the best of God’s
blessings, when improperly directed by erring men, are the greatest
curses. Fire, water, air, steam, electricity, when legitimately
employed, are vast benefactors to man, but when illegitimately
employed, they deal death and destruction all around. Man, when he
answers the end of his being, is almost an angel, but when his noble
faculties are prostituted to base purposes, he becomes a fiend. The
gospel is the power of God unto salvation, to all who cherish it deep
in their hearts, but in the hands of wicked men it may deluge the world
with blood and tears. So religious discussion, where truth and error
grapple, if conducted with proper motives, and in the right spirit, is
a lever of reform; it opens the eyes of the blind, unstops the ears of
the deaf, and often takes away the heart of stone and gives a heart of
flesh; hence reformers in all ages have courted discussion. Socrates
was a famous debater, Jesus traveled from town to town, and Paul from
nation to nation, discussing with the people, and turning the world
upside down. Luther, by his controversial tongue and pen, sent the Pope
of Rome, and the Catholic Church, headlong to the gates of their long
home. After that tongue was silent, and that pen dry, they rallied,
and prolonged their existence. Let every subject of human thought be
discussed freely, but kindly, honestly, wisely. It will do no harm, but
much good. But I have observed that it is the advocates of established
theories, exclusively, that oppose discussion. They do not want their
slumbers disturbed by noisy debate; they might wake up and see and hear
something new. Cry aloud, reformers, and spare not; do not be afraid of
making a noise in the sleepy hollows of the earth. Say to all, Awake,
think, investigate, judge. The divine injunction is, “Prove all things,
and hold fast that which is good;” “Come, let us reason together.”

There was so much opposition to liberal principles, that the people
wanted doctrinal and explanatory discourses, but I always dwelt more
or less on the moral and the spiritual. Mere doctrinal and explanatory
discourses, without showing the moral and spiritual bearing of truth,
do but little good. In almost every place I visited, the preachers
were fighting our faith, and slandering its advocates, and our
friends wanted me to repel these assaults, which gave my sermons a
controversial character, and some times a peppery flavor. But I always
kept the great truth prominent in my ministrations, that heaven and
everlasting life can be enjoyed in this world; that we should lay hold
on them; lay up treasures where moth and rust cannot corrupt, and where
thieves cannot break through and steal. And I had the satisfaction of
knowing that not only many minds were enlightened by truth divine, but
many hearts were improved by its saving influence.

And here I am reminded of another outrageous attack of a Methodist
preacher, Mr. Cooper, on Universalists, in Independence. “They are,”
said he, “the vilest of the vile. The jails, penitentiaries, rum holes,
gambling dens, are full of them. They defy heaven and blaspheme God.
This is their general character.”

I replied: This is all slander, and this lying priest knows it. He
knows that he bears false witness against his acquaintance, his
neighbors, the citizens of this place. He sins willfully, maliciously,
and he had better not let the sun go down on his wrath. All who live
in this community know that he poured out this day vials of falsehood;
they know that some of the best citizens of this county are of the
faith he condemns; they know also, that the wicked places he speaks
of, in this community, are not filled with persons of our faith. He
cannot name a grog-shop keeper in this county, who professes to be a
Universalist; but I can name several advocates of eternal punishment,
and some of them were once members of his church, who are in that
kind of business; and for every gambler here, who ever thought of
calling himself a Universalist, I can name ten who will swear over
their cards and bottles, that there is an endless hell; and for every
Universalist he may produce, who uses profane language, I can produce
ten advocates of eternal punishment, who blaspheme God and heaven
daily by their profanity. I want no better evidence of the immoral
tendency of partialism than the speaker has given to-day; and I am sure
that publicans and sinners will enter the kingdom of heaven before
characters of his stamp. I do not pretend, that all who call themselves
by our name are Christians in life and practice. Are all the believers
in immortal woe Christians? History says, _no_; every man and woman
living on earth will say, _no_. The persecutors and murderers of
Christ and his apostles; those who pursued the Christians in the first
and second centuries of the Christian Era, with fire and sword, were
zealous advocates of eternal burnings. The Catholics who tortured,
hung, beheaded, quartered, millions of Christians and Pagans, were all
staunch believers in hell. Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Puritans,
and Independents, who hung Quakers, burned witches, and persecuted
and murdered each other, and the Catholics, were unwavering in the
fiery faith. Ninety-nine one hundredths of all the thieves, murderers,
pirates, gamblers, rum-sellers, rum-drinkers, are believers in eternal
woe. These are facts, which history and observation substantiate. If
Universalism had been believed, and preached as long and as generally
as eternal punishment has been, and if mankind were no better than
they are now, I, for one, would be ashamed to boast of its good
moral influence. I do not say that all the advocates of eternal
punishment are reprobates. There are noble and pure Christians in all
denominations, many of them, more of that character than otherwise,
but faith in hell has yet the first Christian to make. Believers in
that cruel dogma, many of them, are Christians in spite of their faith
in it. The tendency of faith in hell is downward, while the innate
goodness of their hearts, and the many truths they cherish, direct them
heavenward. I do not contend that all believers in the Restitution
are practical Christians. Would to God they were, but I know they
are not. But give this divine philosophy time to do its work in the
world; give it time to germinate, root, bud, blossom, and yield its
fruit, before you condemn it. Belief in vengeance has had ample time
to develop itself in human character, and it has produced its like the
world over. Give the doctrine of LOVE and JUSTICE an opportunity to
yield its legitimate fruit before you cast it out as evil. Besides, the
immoral men, who hang at our skirts, were cradled, educated, and grew
to manhood, not under the influence of our benevolent faith, but under
the guns of Orthodoxy, and it, if any creed, is responsible for their
character. But because Universalism does not do in a day what Orthodoxy
has failed to do in years, it is said to be immoral in its tendency!

About this time, I had a discussion in a grove near Burlington, Ind.,
with Harper Hanna, a Methodist minister, which continued four days.
I had not been in the neighborhood before the discussion commenced,
neither had a discourse on the Restitution been delivered there,
consequently, the people were totally in the dark concerning our faith,
and strongly prejudiced against it. On the other hand, Mr. Hanna was
in the midst of his friends, and had all their prejudices in his
favor. It was a daring thing to debate under such circumstances, but
I went through with it, and had the satisfaction of knowing that I
did not labor in vain. I had afterwards monthly appointments in the
neighborhood. It was amusing to see the people scan me, and watch every
motion. If I had been an elephant, I would not have been a subject of
more curiosity. The themes of discussion were endless punishment and
universal salvation. In my first speech I said:

Put a man in prison and keep him there one year--that would be a severe
penalty. Keep him there ten years--that would be an awful infliction.
Keep him there his whole natural lifetime--that would be dreadful
beyond description. But what is one year, what are ten years, yea,
seventy years of imprisonment, compared to _endless_ suffering in
hell? Let all the suffering of head and heart, soul and body, that
all mankind have endured in all ages, and all climes, be combined in
_one pang_, and that one pang would not amount to as much woe as one
soul will suffer if doomed to endure ceaseless misery. The fires in
which the damned will live and move, will be in full blast when this
earth shall be gray with age, when the flames of the mid-day sun shall
flicker like the dying taper in its socket, yea, they will continue
to burn deep into the souls of countless millions while heaven shall
stand and God exist. That is endless misery; and that is what Mr. Hanna
affirms, and is trying to prove, will be the doom of a large part of
mankind. It is a dreadful work to charge the God of heaven with doing;
to stand up in this beautiful world, amid the manifestations of God’s
love, and charge the Author of all these blessings, with inflicting
an eternity of woe on worms of the dust. I believe in punishment--in
righteous, just punishment--but I do not, dare not, believe, that the
Father of all mercies, and whose name and nature is love, will, for the
sins of a day, doom innumerable multitudes of his offspring to blow
the fires of hell forever.

At the close of the debate, he adopted a little expedient, that he was
sure would be a perfect success--to him. He wanted the assembly to
decide by _vote_, which party had triumphed in the discussion. Being in
the midst of his friends, and relying on the prejudices of the people,
he doubted not that an overwhelming majority would crown him victor.
I was of the same opinion for the same reasons, and hence opposed his
crafty maneuver. But being determined that the assembly should vote
that he was the hero of the day, he requested all to rise who thought
Harper Hanna has sustained his propositions. About one fourth of the
congregation heeded his call. He looked the picture of amazement at
so few voting that he was the conqueror. “Get up,” said he, “you
misunderstand me;” and he again called on all to rise, who thought
Harper Hanna had sustained his cause. Not another one was added to his
voting friends. Finding he could drum up no more, he requested all to
stand up, who thought Mr. Manford had proved that Universalism was the
gospel. Two thirds of the assembly bounded to their feet. Poor Hanna
turned pale as death, and uttering not a word, sunk into his chair.

On my way back to Lafayette, I rode in company with a man who had heard
of the debate, but did not know me.

“There has been a discussion,” said he, “in Burlington, on
Universalism.”

“Did you attend?”

“No; it is wrong to hold such discussions. Universalism is a _lie_, and
every Christian should call it a _lie_, and have nothing to do with it,
or its advocates. It is the devil who induces Christians to debate with
Universalists. It is one of his schemes to lead souls down to hell.
Several of my neighbors came home from the discussion, advocating that
wicked doctrine. They were Christians, but I fear they are ruined. Two
of them say they shall withdraw from our church. Mr. Hanna did wrong in
debating with that Manford. He has introduced a viper into this county,
and I fear some are already stung to death. Well, I did my duty. I
stayed at home, and did all I could to keep my neighbors at home. But
they were possessed with a desire to hear the debate, and the result is
even worse than I expected. Our minister is going to try to undo the
evil in our neighborhood. Next Sunday he will preach a sermon against
Universalism.”

“Did your minister attend the discussion?”

“He did; and he says he went there to learn what could be said in favor
of such a doctrine. He is sure he can convince all that it is as false
as sin. One of my neighbors says he shall send for Manford to reply to
him. But he cannot preach in our church. He may be sure of that.”




CHAPTER VIII.


  DEBATE IN LAFAYETTE--DIE IN ADAM--ALIVE IN CHRIST--THIS WORLD AND
  WORLD TO COME--BATTLE GROUND--IN MONTICELLO--A REPLY--A PREACHER
  WHIPPED--D. VINES--S. OYLER--I. M. WESTFALL--B. F. FOSTER IN
  INDIANA--REVIVAL POETRY--LADOGA CAMP-MEETING--WORSHIP GOD--IN
  MICHIGAN CITY--AN EPISCOPAL PREACHER--A WET RIDE--DEBATE IN
  DAYTON--DISCUSSION IN JEFFERSON--EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT--END OF THE
  WORLD--SECOND COMING OF CHRIST--ETERNAL LIFE--MEANING OF EVERLASTING.

Soon after this, I had an oral debate in Lafayette, with Mr. Jeffries,
Protestant Methodist, of that place, which continued four days. One
of my principal proof-texts was 1 Corinthians, 15th chapter. I spoke
as follows: This is one of the longest chapters in the New Testament,
and in it the apostle discourses on very important subjects--on life
and death, mortality and immortality, the earthy nature and heavenly
nature. There are two general statements in this chapter. 1st. We must
all die in Adam. 2d. We shall all be made alive in Christ. I will
notice these statements in the order I have named them.

1st. We must all die. “As in Adam all die.” This does not say we must
die because a man by the name of Adam did so and so, six thousand years
ago. Adam is a Hebrew word, and signifies _man_. Job says, “_Man_
that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble.” In the
original it reads, _Adam_, instead of man. That Adam simply means man,
or mankind, is evident from the account of the creation of our race, in
Genesis. “Let us make _man_ (Adam) in our image, after our likeness,
and let _them_ have dominion.” Here the plural verb shows that the word
Adam is employed collectively, meaning _mankind_. “And God created _the
man_ (the Adam) in his own image: in the image of God created he him;
male and female created he _them_.” Here both the application of “male
and female” to _the Adam_, and the plural pronoun at the end of the
verse shows that the man is used generically, and that it is equivalent
to the first of _mankind_. The word Adam, then, was not a proper name,
but an appellative noun for the human species; its application to the
first man, as his proper name, was subsequent and secondary. Hence when
the apostle says, “As in Adam all die,” he means, As in the Adamic
nature, the earthy, corruptible, mortal nature, all die. Adam means
mortal man, and all mankind die in that nature.

2d. The other statement is contained in the same verse--“Even so in
Christ shall all be made alive.” “Made alive in Christ,” is contrasted
with “die in Adam;” and as Adam means the earthy nature, so Christ
means the heavenly nature. Here is universal death in the earthy
nature, and universal life in heavenly nature. All die on earth and all
shall live in heaven. But in the Adamic nature is the _germ_ of the
Christ-like nature, as in the corn is the germ of the future stock.
In this chapter the apostle gives this beautiful analogy thus: “But
some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do
they come?” In answering these questions the apostle shows, that the
germ of the heavenly man is in the earthy man. “Thou fool! that which
thou sowest is not quickened except it die.” The seed corresponds to
the mortal body; the _germ_ corresponds to the spirit in man; and as
the sowing of the seed develops the germ into a beautiful and vigorous
plant, to bask in the sunshine, inhale the air, and drink the dews of
heaven, so the death of the mortal body quickens the indwelling spirit,
and it enters with renewed vigor on its immortal and heavenly life.
The seed then is an emblem of man; its resurrection an emblem of man’s
resurrection. Who can deny a resurrection when the world is so full
of emblems pointing man to that great fact in his own destiny. “So,”
says the apostle, referring to this beautiful illustration, “is the
resurrection of _the dead_”--all the dead, all who die in the earthy
nature. In the words, “It is sown,” the writer seems to refer to the
seed sown in the ground, still making it an emblem of man. Mankind sown
in corruption, dishonor, are raised incorruptible, glorious. The second
body is more glorious than the first, as the rose is more glorious than
the seed. These citations show what the apostle means by the words,
“made alive in Christ;” and remember, that all who die in the Adamic
nature are thus to be made alive.

“Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to
God, even the Father,” etc. (See verses 24-28). Here we learn what is
to be destroyed. 1. “All rule.” 2. “All authority.” 3. “All power.”
4. “Death.” And mark you, that death is the LAST enemy. My friend
asserts, that death is NOT the last enemy, but that beyond death, and
IN HELL, there are legions of enemies to be the everlasting tormentors
of countless millions of mankind. If the gentleman is correct, death
is not the _last_ enemy, but rather the _first real enemy_, and opens
the door to the fires, furies, and demons of perdition, which will burn
and lash their victims world without end. Let it also be noted, that
the last enemy is to be DESTROYED. The apostle continues his statements
concerning the subjugation of all things to God thus: “And when all
things shall be subdued to God, then shall the Son himself be subject
to him, that put all things under him that God may be all in all.”
This is the END to which mankind are tending, and this consummation
will surely be realized. All sin, error, suffering and death, shall be
abolished; all mankind subdued to God, and God ALL IN ALL. The sum of
this chapter then is this--all mankind are mortal, corruptible, and
must die; death is destruction to the _body_, but life to the _soul_;
glory, honor and immortality, are the rich inheritance of mankind.

“The apostle,” replied Mr. J., “teaches the resurrection of the _body_,
not of the _spirit_, and I admit that he teaches the resurrection of
all the dead, and when that shall be effected the absent spirits will
claim their long lost bodies.”

I rejoined: The gentleman tells us, that the writer of this chapter
teaches the resurrection of the bodies of all the dead. If he is
correct, God will raise the bodies of saints and sinners, Jews and
Gentiles, incorruptible, glorious, heavenly, and when that shall be
done, he will unlock hell, and take the deformed, corrupt, wretched
spirits, that have been imprisoned in that foul dungeon for thousands
of years, and perhaps millions of ages, and put them into those
beautiful, glorious, heavenly bodies. That would be a union of perfect
purity with total depravity, a marriage of heaven and hell, and two
bodies so totally unlike would fly asunder like fire and water. The
truth is, the apostle speaks not of the resurrection of this mortal
body, these bones and muscles, this flesh and blood, but of _the
man_--the inner, spiritual, real man. This body is necessary, while we
are denizens of earth. By means of it the spirit is connected with the
outer world, but when we shall be dwellers of the spirit land, we shall
have no further use of these mortal tabernacles.

In his first speech on the proposition relating to endless punishment,
Mr. Jeffries boasted that he should make short work of me and of my
faith. “I have,” said he, “one text to quote, and one question to ask.
The text is Matthew xii. 31, 32. ‘Wherefore I say unto you, All manner
of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever
speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but
whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.’ And this is
the question: If the sin against the Holy Ghost was not to be forgiven
in this world, or in the world to come, _where will it be forgiven_? I
once had a debate with Jonathan Kidwell, and I cited this verse, and
asked this question, and it brought the discussion to a _close_, for
Mr. Kidwell could neither answer the question nor explain the passage
so as to save Universalism from total destruction. The debate was to
continue four days, but it lasted twenty minutes.”

I responded as follows: The gentleman pretends that he once “used up”
one man by one question, and one text, and he expects to demolish me in
the same easy and summary manner; but the sequel may show that he is
over sanguine. I will show that the passage on which he so confidently
relies to sustain his monstrous proposition, affords it no aid whatever.

1. If the words, “this world and the world to come,” mean this life and
the life to come, as my friend supposes, then _all sin_, save the _one
sin_ against the Holy Ghost, may be forgiven in the _future state_. The
passage reads, “_All_ manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men.” The parallel passage (Mark iii. 28) reads thus: “_All
sins_ shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and [all] blasphemies
wherewithsoever they shall blaspheme.” It is as clear as daylight,
from these passages, that _all sins_, except the _one_ specified, can
be forgiven “in this world or the world to come.” If the gentleman is
right in his application of the passage, _all sins but one_, may be
forgiven in the future state of being, and his creed is consequently
_false_, for it asserts that God will not permit a sin to be forgiven
on the other side of the river, but every sin the soul harbors when
it shuffles off its mortal coil, becomes fossilized, immortal as God
himself. He must either abandon his text or his unforgiving creed.

2. The gentleman relies on the word, _shall_--the sin against the Holy
Ghost shall not be forgiven. That word occurs twice in the passage,
and I wish to call his special attention to where it occurs the second
time. ALL SINS SHALL BE FORGIVEN. If _shall_ is to be understood in
the absolute sense in one place, it must in the other, and then the
passage means, that all sin, except that _one_ against the Holy Ghost,
SHALL be forgiven somewhere, either in this world or the world to come.
The passage, then, instead of blasting our blissful hope and cherished
faith, that all sin and wrong will ultimately end, strikes a death-blow
at the gentleman’s creed concerning the immortality of wickedness of
every name and grade.

3. It is by no means certain, that “this world and world to come,”
means this life and life to come. The most learned men of all schools
tell us, that the passage should be translated, this _age_ and _age_
to come, meaning the Jewish age or dispensation, and Christian age or
dispensation. Dr. Adam Clarke takes this view of the words: “Though I
follow the common translation, yet I am FULLY SATISFIED the meaning of
the words is, neither in this _dispensation_, viz., the Jewish, nor in
that which is to come, viz., the _Christian_. _Olam ha-bo, the world to
come_, is a constant phrase for the times of the Messiah, in the Jewish
writings.” Bishop Pearce says, “Rather, neither in this _age_, nor in
the _age_ to come;” meaning the Jewish and Christian dispensations.

“Ah!” said he, in his next speech, “if the sin against the Holy Ghost
was not to be forgiven in the Jewish age or Christian age, when was
it to be forgiven? The Jewish age commenced in the days of Moses and
ended when Christ was crucified; the Christian age commenced then,
and will not end till death shall be swallowed up in victory. _When_
and _where_ can that sin be forgiven? Will Mr. Manford answer that
question?”

Reply. The Jewish and Christian ages belong to _this stage_ of
existence, and when the Jordan of death shall be passed, we shall not
be living in the Jewish age or Christian age, but in the _spirit age_,
_spirit world_, and the passage does not intimate that sin or any other
sin cannot be forgiven there. The truth is, that the wisdom, the light,
the glory of the spirit world will soon transform every soul into its
image. When the sun crosses the equator, on the twentieth of March,
how dead the vegetable kingdom lies, horror wide extends his desolate
domain. But the sun soon begins to impart his renovating grace to root
and seed, and the result is, a _general resurrection_ on hill, dale and
plain. Nothing can resist his influence; all vegetation comes forth to
newness of life. So the wisdom and love of heaven, corresponding to the
light and heat of the sun of this world, illuminates and warms every
soul, and quickens each and all into newness of life. Say not, then,
that sin cannot be put away from the soul on the other side of the
river. We should not cheat ourselves by delaying to live a Christian
life till middle age, or till we enter the spirit land, but in the
words of Dr. Watts,

  “While the lamp holds out to burn,
   The vilest sinner may return.”

The _lamp of life_ will burn forever, and the time or place will
never be known, where and when, the sinner cannot return to truth, to
virtue--to God. Every tree and shrub is invigorated and developed by
the sun’s life-giving beams, so the great spiritual Sun does not shine
in vain; every soul will be blessed by his divine emanations. In the
language of the Bible, “All nations whom thou hast made shall go and
worship before thee O Lord, and glorify thy name.”

“You forget,” said my opponent, in his last speech on the above
passage, “that those who committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, were
in danger of _eternal damnation_.”

No, sir, I have not forgotten that; neither have I forgotten, that if
the sin named is absolutely _never_ to be forgiven, the sinner who
commits it is not in _danger_ of suffering damnation, but is _sure_ of
suffering it, just as sure as he has sinned. There is no remedy, his
doom is sealed. These words, then, clearly imply, that the punishment
named may be arrested. This is an important consideration. Again, the
word, _eternal_ is from the same Greek term that _world_ is, and Dr.
Clarke, as we have seen, says it means _age_, and learned men of all
denominations admit it signifies age, time, life-time. I have now
noticed every point the gentleman made on this noted passage, and it is
evident that it affords the dogma of immortal wretchedness no support.

I delivered several lectures at the Tippecanoe battle ground, and
became acquainted with many persons, who have ever since been steadfast
friends. This place is six miles north of Lafayette. There is a marsh
on one side, and a small stream, with a narrow bottom, covered with
thick woods, on the other. The distance from the swamp to the stream is
about three hundred yards, and on this narrow belt of ground General
Harrison’s army was encamped, and the battle fought. No military man, I
suppose, would deem that a safe camping-ground in an enemy’s country.
But Harrison did not expect the Indians would fight, but rather treat
for peace; but he should have been more cautious. He repelled the
attack, with heavy loss to his army, but if he had been defeated, his
force would have suffered sorely, for the Wabash river was in his rear,
only one mile distant, and that without bridge or boats.

I also preached in Monticello, and was replied to by a Methodist
minister. My text was, “Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel
to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved,
and he that believeth not shall be damned.” The gospel, I said,
comprises the theological and moral doctrines that Jesus taught. He
told men, that God was the Father of the spirits of all flesh; that the
high and the low, the rich and the poor, the wise and the ignorant, the
black and the white, the slave and his master, were alike the children
of God, and belong to and compose one family; that the physical,
intellectual, and moral bounties of God’s store-house were accessible
to all, and that the Master of the feast invites all to partake freely
and live. He had doomed none, and never would doom any, to eternal
starvation. “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters,
and ye that have no money, come, buy wine and milk without money and
without price.” If we are wise and partake of this feast of fat things,
we live, are blessed with salvation, and the kingdom of God, which is
righteousness, joy and peace in the holy spirit, reigns in the soul.
But if we shun the rich provisions of the Father’s board, walk on the
other side, choose darkness, error and sin, rather than light, truth
and virtue, woe be to us. Every heavenly principle, every law of God
condemns us, till we set our faces heavenward, and turn our steps
upward.

“There was not,” said the preacher, “one particle of gospel in that
sermon. Mankind were lost and ruined by the fall of Adam; the seal of
eternal damnation was _burnt_ deep into the hearts of all, by Adam’s
apostasy, and God became incarnate to make it _possible_ for man to be
saved. Those who believe in the incarnate God are saved from hell, from
the wrath of God, and the curse of the fall; but those who reject the
crucified Jesus, are lost beyond redemption, and the seal of damnation
will burn deeper and deeper into their immortal souls; they will be
abandoned by God, Christ, angels, and all the saints will say, _amen_.”

He was one of the most orthodox preachers I ever heard. When in the
pulpit, he was always harping on the mysterious jargons of Orthodoxy,
with his face elongated, and a countenance bordering on despair; but
out of the pulpit he was a boy, and a foolish boy too. When preaching
in Logansport, shortly after General Tipton died, a noted citizen of
that place, he cried, “There, General Tipton, that old sinner, is dead
and gone to hell.” A son of Mr. Tipton, soon after, met the preacher
on a long bridge at Logansport, and with a whip gave him a pretty hard
thrashing. He begged for mercy, and promised not to talk in that style
any more.

During the first two years I resided in Lafayette, I seldom met a
minister of my faith. There were only two others in Indiana at that
time, and they were in remote parts of the state, and being aged
men did not preach much, but after that time I had more ministerial
associates. D. Vines, of Frankfort, spoke some in public, and received
Letter of Fellowship. His intentions were good, but his qualifications
meager. He subsequently became a Swedenborgian, or a Spiritualist, and
I have lost sight of him. Samuel Oyler, of Jefferson, also entered the
ministry. He preached three or four years in the south part of the
state, and then came out a lawyer, and, I understand, he succeeds well
in that profession. I. M. Westfall, of Thornton, left the Methodist
church, of which he was a lay-member, and commenced preaching without
any preparation, save strong faith and ardent zeal. He possessed a
good mind, and soon became a popular speaker. He remained in Indiana
about one year, and then moved to Iowa City, Iowa. He continued in the
ministry till recently. At the present time he resides in Minnesota,
and is practising medicine. At Perrysville, where I had preached
monthly for two years, a meeting-house was erected, and a society
organized. Being in Oxford, Ohio, I met with B. F. Foster, a young
man, who had just commenced preaching, and prevailed on him to move to
Perrysville, and take charge of the society in that place. He, however,
soon left P. and located in Terre Haute, where our friends were
building a fine meeting-house. He has resided in Indiana ever since,
and is a popular and useful minister. He has been for many years pastor
of the society in Indianapolis, and at the present time he is State
Librarian.

An Association, embracing the country from Terre Haute to Lafayette,
called the Wabash Valley Association, was organized. The meeting that
organized it was held in Perrysville, and it was an enthusiastic
gathering. Seven or eight societies were represented, all recently
formed. Many went on horseback, in wagons and carriages, thirty, forty,
and fifty miles. Our friends were alive with zeal, and did not mind
traveling fifty miles to a good meeting.

The United Brethren held a noisy meeting in Warren county, and the
following lines were very popular with the Brethren, and they often
sung them:

  The devil is mad,
  And I am glad,
      _Glory, O hallelujah_.

  The devil may pout,
  But I will shout.
      _Glory, O hallelujah_.

I noticed this meeting, and quoted their popular hymn in the _Teacher_,
and the Brethren in that county were very indignant. At their next
meeting one of their preachers took up the matter. “That little
Universalist preacher,” said he, “that lives in Lafayette, and prints
that Universalist paper, is mad because we sing about his daddy.”

I attended, on a dark and gloomy night, a fanatical camp-meeting of
the Methodists, near Ladoga. It was held in a dense forest. When a
mile from the camp, I heard the noise of the nocturnal worshipers.
Arriving on the ground, the scene that opened to the vision, beggared
description. The whole camp seemed to be in an uproar. Preachers were
preaching, exhorters exhorting, singers singing, shouters shouting, and
jumpers were jumping. Some seemed to be suffering intense agony, others
as happy as clams at high water. Some kept their seats, while others
were hopping, skipping and jumping like chickens with their heads cut
off. One man ran past me without looking to the right or left. “Where
are you going?” said I. “To glory.” A preacher screamed as loud as his
lungs would allow, “The devil is in the camp, and must be driven out.
Get the horn, form in line, march round the ground three times, blow
the horn, the devil must be driven out, the walls of Jericho shall
fall.” The procession was formed, the horn was blown, and the march
was made. Whether Satan left the camp, and the said walls fell at this
demonstration, the master of the ceremony did not see proper to inform
us. I left the ground about midnight, when the excitement was under
full headway, and my reflections while walking back to the village were
as follows: Is this the proper way to worship God? Does he require
us to make fools of ourselves, and act like bedlamites? Is religion
fanaticism? Is regeneration an hallucination? I will not believe a
word of it. Religion consists in love to God and man. Noise, uproar,
fanaticism are not worship, are not religion, are not regeneration.
God speaks to the soul with the still small voice of inspiration and
intuition, and the truly pious make but little outward demonstration.
Empty wagons make much noise, heavy laden ones pass our streets
without hardly being heard. But then I do not wonder at the noise,
lamentation, agonizing, and every other extravagance, of these people.
They think God is frowning on this world, that his wrath is kindled to
its hottest pitch, that he has already banished most of the dead to
the infernal regions, and that during every moment of time crowds are
driven from earth to hell, and that we all stand on the very brink of
a bottomless pit. No wonder the victims of this terrible belief are
nearly insane. Strange they are not all raving mad. O God, enlighten
their minds concerning thee, whom to know is life eternal.

I visited Michigan City by request, and delivered four discourses.
The Episcopal clergyman of the place, took the trouble to go around
town, and destroy all the notices of the meetings that were tacked
up, and to tell the people not to go near me. But large congregations
attended, and all seemed much interested. In one of my lectures I gave
a history of the “rise and progress” of the Episcopal Church. Stated
that it was conceived in sin and brought forth in iniquity; that Henry
VIII., universally admitted to have been the most beastly monarch
that ever reigned in England, was the first Episcopalian, and the
father of the sect; that church from Henry’s day to this day has been
a proud, arrogant, insolent, overbearing concern; in England it draws
half of its support from unwilling pockets, from those who belong to
other communions; that it cares not who starves provided its priests,
bishops, and lords live in indolence, race horses, chase foxes, and
drink brandy; it never took but one short step from the Catholic
Church, the mother of harlots, and it was now creeping back into the
arms of its old mamma; but there are some live men and women in the
church, and they deplore the stupidity, coldness and old hunkerism of
the lifeless body to which they are bound.

The distance from Lafayette to Michigan City, is about one hundred
miles, and for fifteen miles on each side of the Kankakee river, there
was not, in those days, a house. It commenced raining on my way to
Michigan City, when I had reached the south margin of that wilderness
of prairie, and it poured down in torrents till I made the first house,
thirty miles distant. It was a swamp nearly all the way, and the
flood of that day made the road, such as it was, nearly impassable. I
sometimes thought I should have to return; but about ten at night I
reached a cabin, drenched with rain, covered with mud, and as hungry as
a bear.

A Presbyterian elder, by the name of Smith, was eager for a debate, and
he was gratified. We occupied the Presbyterian church in Dayton, and
the poor elder did one pretty hard day’s work. He was frightened out of
most of his wits; his nerves were unstrung, and his hand so trembled
he could not hold his Bible to read his texts. I pitied him, but dealt
as hard blows as I could strike. He was disgusted with himself, and
proposed, a few weeks after, to try again, hoping to do better. We
spent two days at Rossville, near his home, and he then willingly
retired without further debating.

A few days after this affair, I spent four days in discussion with
Mr. Coon, a Scotch Presbyterian, and Calvinistic “up to the hub.” He
was a prominent man in his church, intelligent, and well educated. He
subsequently published a book of three or four hundred pages, against
the doctrine of the Restitution, and in defense of eternal punishment.
The discussion was held in Jefferson; and though the weather was
intensely cold, a large number attended. Mr. Coon was a strong man, and
all were anxious to hear. He had thoroughly prepared himself for the
work. It required two or three men to carry his books to and from the
church. I had my Bible, and perhaps two or three other books. He talked
English, and Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew. Mr. Taylor, a Presbyterian
minister, who had just closed an eight days’ debate with John O’Kane,
of the Campbellite Church, was one of the moderators, and he prayed for
Mr. Coon, imploring the Lord to help him on that important occasion.

“These shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous
into life eternal,” (Matt. xxv. 46,) was one of his proof-texts. “It is
evident,” said he, “that this passage teaches the endless punishment
of the wicked, for the following reasons: 1. It relates to what would
transpire at the _end of the world_. This, and the preceding chapter,
is an answer to the questions, ‘What shall be the signs of thy coming,
and of the _end of the world_?’ Matt. xxiv. 3. 2. ‘These’ were to
go into everlasting punishment when Christ would come the _second
time_, and that event was to take place at the end of the world. 3.
Everlasting is from the same Greek word that is rendered _eternal_,
and consequently the everlasting punishment is to continue as long as
the eternal life. If one will end so will the other end. 4. The best
scholars tell us, that the Greek word here rendered everlasting and
eternal, signifies _endless duration_.”

I replied: Mr. Coon tells us, that his text was to be fulfilled at the
end of the world spoken of in Matthew xxiv. He is doubtless correct.
Now, learned men of all denominations tell us, that _world_ there
means the Jewish Dispensation, and the _end_ of the world the end of
that Dispensation. Most of them translate the passage, “end of the
AGE.” It is so rendered by Doddridge, Macknight, Whitby, Pearce, Le
Clerc, Hammond, Wakefield and Kenrick--all learned men, and save one
or two, advocates of endless misery. The word, _world_ is often used
in this sense in the New Testament. “Now once in the end of the world
hath Christ appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.”
Heb. ix. 24. Christ did appear at the end of the Jewish Dispensation
for that purpose. The Jews divided time into _two ages_--the _age
before_ Christ, and the _age after_ Christ. The _first age_ ended, as
Paul says, “when Christ appeared.” The end of _the world_, then, took
place eighteen hundred years ago, and _then_ the gentleman’s text was
fulfilled.

2. When Christ was to come the second time, some were to go away
into everlasting punishment. When was he thus to come? In this same
discourse Jesus speaks of that coming, and affirms, that it would take
place in _that generation_. “And then shall appear the sign of the
Son of man, ... and they shall see the Son of man coming.” He then
states when he would come: “This _generation_ shall not pass till all
these things be fulfilled.” Matt. xxiv. 30, 34. On another occasion,
addressing his disciples, he said, “But when they persecute you in this
city, flee ye into another; for verily I say unto you, ye shall not
have gone over the cities of Israel till the Son of man be come.” Matt.
x. 27. He would come so soon that the disciples would not be able to
visit all of Israel’s cities. At another time he said, “For the Son of
man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his angels; and then
he shall reward every man according to his works. Verily I say unto
you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till
they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.” Matt. xvi. 27, 28. He
was to come the second time before some who heard these words would
die. He intimated that the apostle John would live to witness this
coming. “Peter seeing John, saith to Jesus, Lord, what shall this man
do? Jesus saith to him, If I will that he _tarry till I come_, what is
that to thee? Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that
the disciple would not die; yet Jesus said not to him, He shall not
die; but, If I will that he _tarry till I come_, what is that to thee.”
John xxi. 21-23. It requires considerable effort to misunderstand these
plain declarations. Jesus told his hearers, that he would come the
second time, 1. In the generation in which he lived; 2. So soon the
disciples would not have time to visit all Judah’s cities; 3. Before
some he addressed would die; 4. That John, the beloved disciple, might
live to see him come. In the face of all this testimony, Mr. Coon tells
us, that coming is _yet a future event_! But the truth is, that coming
took place at the _beginning_ of the Christian Dispensation, at the
_ushering in_ of the Gospel Age, at the _setting up_ of the kingdom of
God. The revelator, who was the disciple John, says, he “saw the holy
city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven.” Rev. xxi. 3.
Judaism had passed away, Paganism was dead, and a new order of things
had commenced--old things had passed away, all things had become new.
The world had entered on a _new era_. This is what Christ meant by his
coming in _power_ and _glory_.

3. The gentleman truly says, that everlasting and eternal are from
the same original word. He then _assumes_ that “eternal life” in his
text means endless blessedness, and then _infers_, that “everlasting
punishment” means endless wretchedness. His assumption and inference
are alike fictions. According to the New Testament, the Christian, in
this world, is in possession of eternal or everlasting life. “He that
believeth on me HATH EVERLASTING LIFE.” “Verily, verily, I say unto
you, he that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, HATH
EVERLASTING LIFE, and shall not come into condemnation, but IS PASSED
from death unto life.” John v. 24. “This is LIFE eternal, that they
might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast
sent.” John xvii. 3. Eternal life is gospel life--_spiritual life_,
and every Christian man and woman is now in possession of this life.
When a person is _alive_ to every thing holy and good, possesses the
spirit of Christ, and lives the life of Christ, it may be truly said
of him, he “HATH everlasting life.” So, when a man’s character is the
reverse of this, when he is a son of error and sin, it may be truly
said of him, he HATH everlasting punishment. If everlasting life can be
enjoyed here, cannot everlasting punishment be suffered here? Again,
a person may be a Christian to-day, and consequently in possession of
everlasting life; but his love may wax cold, he may become a sinner,
an unbeliever, an infidel; he will then be no longer in possession of
everlasting life. So, an infidel and a sinner of to-day may become a
saint, like St. Paul; he then passes from death to life, from suffering
everlasting punishment to the possession of everlasting life. But, by
everlasting punishment, Jesus had direct reference to the temporal
desolation that was soon to befall his countrymen at the end of the
Jewish Dispensation. The kingdom was to be taken from them, and they
were to be cast out into outer darkness, till the fullness of the
Gentiles should come in.

4. Mr. Coon informs us, that the Greek terms, _aion_, _aionios_, mean
endless duration. These are two forms of one word. _Aion_ is a noun,
and _ios_ added to it, forms the adjective. This word occurs in these
two forms three times in the twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth chapters of
Matthew. In the twenty-fourth chapter, the disciples inquired of Jesus,
“What shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the _end of the world_?”
These two chapters answer these two questions. Now, _world_ is from
_aion_, the same word rendered everlasting, and eternal, in the text.
There was then to be an _end_ to _aion_. Mr. Coon tells us, that this
word means _duration without end_, and in the same speech cites the
same word to prove that it (_aion_) is to _end_! One passage explains
the other. In one place Jesus speaks of _aionios_ punishment, without
stating whether he means endless or limited time; in the other place
the apostles inquire concerning the _end_ of the _aion_, and Jesus in
answering their question, tells them, that it _shall end_, “but,” he
adds, “the _end_ is not yet.” Many things would transpire before that
event would occur. “He that endureth to the _end_ shall be saved....
And the gospel of this kingdom shall be preached in all the world for
a witness to all nations; and then shall the _end_ come.... Verily,
verily, I say unto you, _this generation_ shall not pass, _till all
these things be fulfilled_.” Matt. xxiv. 6, 13, 14, 34. We have, then,
the word of Jesus for it, that _aion_, and consequently, _aionios_,
everlasting punishment, may end. I will give the true definition of
_aion_, according to learned men--all believers in endless woe:

SCHLEUSNER.--“Any space of time, whether longer or shorter, past,
present, or future, to be determined by the persons or things spoken
of, and the scope of the subject--the life or age of man; any space in
which we measure human life, from birth to death.”

DONNEGAN.--“_Aion_, time; a space of time; lifetime and life; the
ordinary period of man’s life; the age of man; man’s estate; a long
period of time; eternity. _Aionios_, of long duration; eternal,
lasting, permanent.”

SCHREVELIUS.--“_Aion_, an age, a long period of time; indefinite
duration; time, whether longer or shorter, past, present or future;
life, the life of man. _Aionios_, of long duration, lasting, sometimes
everlasting, sometimes lasting through life.”

This is the definition learned men give the word. I will now show that
the Bible attaches the same meaning to it.

1st. _Everlasting._ “And I will give unto thee and thy seed, all the
land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession.” Gen. xvii. 8.

“And I will make of thee a multitude of people, and will give this land
(Canaan) to thy seed after thee, for an everlasting possession.” Gen.
xlviii. 4.

Now, was this possession to be endless? No, for it ceased long ago!
But let me read still more: “Unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting
hills”--“The everlasting mountains were scattered.” Hab. iii. 6. The
gentleman believes that the everlasting hills and mountains will all be
destroyed when the world comes to an end!

“For their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood.” Exod.
xl. 15. “And he (Phinehas) shall have it, and his seed after him, even
the covenant, for an everlasting priesthood.” Num. xxv. 13. “And this
shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an atonement for the
children of Israel once every year.” Lev. xvi. 34. Was the priesthood
to be of endless duration? or has it not long since been abolished by
the priesthood of Christ? Such, my friends, is a sample of the Bible
use of this word.

2d. _Forever._ “He (Solomon) shall build me an house, and I will
establish it forever.” 1 Chron. xvii. 12. This house although
established forever, was long since torn down and destroyed! “For
the land which thou seest, to thee (Abram) will I give it, and to
thy seed forever.” Gen. xiii. 15. “You will keep it (the passover) a
feast by an ordinance forever.” Exod. xii. 14. Was the observance of
the passover to be of endless duration? “They shall be your bondsmen
forever.” Lev. xxv. 46. Were they to be bondsmen throughout duration?
“I went to the bottom of the mountains; the earth with her bars was
about me forever”--that is, three days! Jonah ii. 6. “The righteous
shall inherit the land, and dwell therein forever.” Ps. xxxvii. 29. Are
the righteous to dwell in a land endlessly? “And his master shall bore
his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him forever,”--that
is, as long as he live. Exod. xxi. 6. “And they shall dwell in the
land that I have given my servant Jacob, wherein your fathers have
dwelt, and they shall dwell therein, forever; and my servant David
shall be their prince forever.” Ezek. xxvii. 25. This needs no comment.
“But Judah shall dwell forever, and Jerusalem from generation to
generation,”--from _genea_ to _genea_. “For I have told him that I will
judge his house forever, for the iniquity which he knoweth.” Will the
Almighty be endlessly judging the house of Eli? And if to judge forever
does not mean endless judgment, why should to punish forever mean
endless punishment? Can any one tell? Paul, writing to Philemon, says
of Onesimus,--“For perhaps he departed for a season, that thou shouldst
receive him forever”--not endlessly, surely!

This noted passage, then, affords no evidence that punishment will be
inflicted duration without end. Dr. Samuel Johnson, the great moralist
and writer of the last century, speaking of this passage, and others of
like character, says: “They may admit of a mitigated interpretation.”

The discussion continued four days--closed Saturday evening. I
delivered a _practical_ discourse on Sunday morning, made no reference
to the debate, and at the close organized a society. Mr. Coon preached
in the afternoon, and the discussion was his _text_. He misrepresented
me, the good faith, and poured out volleys of abuse on all who did not
subscribe to his fire and brimstone creed. I replied in the evening,
and handled Calvinism without gloves, but he kept out of the way.




CHAPTER IX.


  QUESTIONED J. O’KANE IN DAYTON--HE BEAT A RETREAT--HE REPLIED
  IN CRAWFORDSVILLE--THREE RESURRECTIONS, NATIONAL, MORAL, AND
  IMMORTAL--CONVERSATION IN WEST LEBANON--EVERLASTING, FOREVER--KINGDOM
  OF GOD--SIN, ERROR, SUFFERING NOT ENDLESS--IN SOUTHERN INDIANA--WHY
  LIVE A CHRISTIAN LIFE--BIGOTRY IN BRECKENRIDGE--DISCUSSION WITH
  MR. DICKERSON--CALVINISM--ARMINIANISM--UNIVERSALISM--DEBATE IN
  CHAMBERSBURG.

When in Dayton on one occasion to fill an appointment, I heard J.
O’Kane preach an excellent sermon--it was all Universalism. His
subjects were the Mosaic and Christian covenants. Moses was the head of
the first, and Christ the head of the second covenant; the blessings of
the first were _temporal_, and were designed only for the _Jews_; the
blessings of the second were _spiritual_, including the _forgiveness
of sin_ and _life everlasting_, and were designed for _all nations_.
The whole Jewish nation was blessed temporally, and all nations,
families and kindred would be blessed spiritually. He dwelt long and
emphatically on these points--proved and illustrated them in a very
satisfactory manner. My friends evidently thought that was pretty good
Universalism, as it certainly was. But I was satisfied that it was
all a _blind_, and I resolved to quiz him a little. As soon as he was
through, I asked the privilege to propound a few questions, and stated
I should be much pleased if he would answer them.

“Ask as many questions as you please, and I shall be sure to answer
them,” said he, in not a very agreeable tone.

“I understood you to say that the blessings of the Christian covenant
are for all mankind, and that all nations, families and kindreds of the
earth would surely participate in those blessings. Did I understand
you correctly?”

“Yes, sir.”

“I also understood you, that the blessings of said covenant are
spiritual--the forgiveness of sin and life everlasting. Did I
understand you correctly?”

“You did.”

“Once more. Do you believe that all nations, families and kindreds will
be blessed by having their sins forgiven, and with life everlasting?”

“Suppose I don’t,” said he, in an angry tone.

“But why equivocate? You have just said you did believe this.”

“You don’t know what I said.”

Mr. O’Kane was in a pretty tight place, for it was well known, that
he was a staunch advocate of eternal woe. Why he delivered such a
discourse was best known to himself. Perhaps he hoped to catch some of
our brethren by pretending to be with them in faith.

Subsequently, he replied to a discourse I delivered in Crawfordsville,
from these words: “Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming in the
which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and they shall
come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life;
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.” John
v. 28, 29. There are, I remarked, three distinct resurrections spoken
of in the Bible--a temporal, a moral, and an immortal resurrection.
When the Bible speaks of a resurrection, we must learn from the context
of the passage, which of those resurrections is intended. I will
briefly notice some passages where these three resurrections are spoken
of.

In Ezekiel, thirty-seventh chapter, the prophet is writing of the
return of the Jews to Palestine from Babylon, where they had been
enslaved for seventy years. The chapter is headed--“The resurrection
of dry bones.” I will cite the whole passage: “The hand of the Lord
was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the Lord, and set me
down in the valley which was full of bones, and caused me to pass by
them round about; and, behold, there were very many in the open valley;
and, lo, they were very dry. And he said unto me, Son of man, can these
bones live? And I answered, O Lord God, thou knowest. Again he said
unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones,
hear the word of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones:
Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live; and I
will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover
you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall
know that I am the Lord. So I prophesied as I was commanded; and as I
prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came
together, bone to his bone. And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the
flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them above; but there
was no breath in them. Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind,
prophesy, Son of man, and say unto the wind, Thus saith the Lord God:
Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that
they may live. So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came
into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding
great army.” Ezek. xxxvii. 1-10. Now mark the explanations: “Then he
said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel;
behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut
off for our parts. Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith
the Lord God: Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and bring
you into the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am the Lord,
when I have opened your graves, O my people, and brought you up out
of your graves. And I shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live,
and I shall place you in your own land; then shall ye know that I the
Lord have spoken it, and performed it, saith the Lord.” Ezek. xxxvii.
11-14. This was a temporal resurrection, and included also a moral
resurrection. It was the return of “the whole house of Israel” to “the
land of Israel from Babylon.” When in Babylon, they were said to be in
their _graves_, their _hope was lost_, but they were to come up out of
the graves, and be restored to their beloved country.

The same events are also predicted in Daniel xii. 2. “And many of them
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.” The connection shows
this to be the same kind of a resurrection spoken of in Ezekiel. That
all this was to take place within a few years, is evident from the
following consideration: 1. The previous verse reads thus: “And at
that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for
the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such
as never was since there was a nation even to that same time; and at
that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the book.” Dan. xii. 1. This prince Michael was a ruler in
Persia, while the Jews were in Babylon. He is spoken of in two other
places in that book. “But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood
me one and twenty days; but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes,
came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia. But I
will show thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth; and there
is none that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your prince.”
Dan. x. 13, 21. It is clear from these quotations, that Michael was a
prince of Persia, and that he was living when the Jews were in Babylon.
Mark also, that the resurrection, there spoken of, was to occur in
Michael’s lifetime, when Michael “would stand up,” and consequently
it must have taken place long ago. 2. The question was asked, (verse
6) “How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?” and the answer
given was, “It shall be for a time, times and half a time,” (verse 7.)
In verse 12, the period intended by these “times” is stated to be “one
thousand three hundred and thirty-five days,” making a little more
than four years. “Time,” singular, means one year, “times,” plural,
three years, “half a time,” six month. The resurrection, then, referred
to, was to take place between four and five years from the time the
prophet saw the vision--another evidence that this resurrection was
realized in the return of the Jews to Palestine from the land of their
captivity. 3. Daniel was to live to witness the transpiring of this
event. “Go thy way,” said the angel to Daniel, “till the end be; for
thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of these days.” (Verse
13.) It then seems certain, that this resurrection was to take place
within a few years after Daniel had a vision of it. Two men, at least,
then existing, were to live to witness the event--Michael, a prince of
Persia, and Daniel, a prophet of the Lord, and to behold it they had
to live only about four years and a half longer. The nation was raised
from its grave, from the dust of the earth, and those who were loyal
through the dark night of bondage, returned to the land of promise with
glory and honor; but those who were traitors during the times that
tried men’s souls, returned with shame and contempt.

The Bible also reveals an immortal resurrection. Says Jesus, whose
mission it was to bring life and immortality to light, “In the
resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are
as the angels of God in heaven.... God is not the God of the dead,
but of the living, for all--the dead--live unto him.” Matt. xxii. 30,
32. This is not a physical, temporal, or moral resurrection, merely,
but a resurrection to eternal life, and a blissful immortality. The
apostle Paul (1 Cor. xv.) dwells long and emphatically on this glorious
resurrection. “As in Adam,” says he, “all die, even so in Christ
shall all be made alive.... It is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body,
it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is
a spiritual body.” “For this corruptible must put on incorruption,
and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on
immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength of
sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.” 1 Cor. xv. 22, 43, 44, 53-57.

The terms in these passages clearly indicate, that the immortal
resurrection is the subject of discourse; and that all mankind are
interested in it. It is not a resurrection from the grave, or from the
dust of the earth, for the immortal spirit which now tabernacles in the
flesh, never dies, except morally, never descends to the grave or dust,
except figuratively, but as the wise man says, “Dust shall return to
the earth as it was; and the _spirit_ shall return unto God that gave
it.” Eccles. xii. 7. The body only dies, it returns to the dust--the
spirit never; it returns to God.

Hence my text must refer to some other kind of a resurrection, for it
speaks of coming up out of graves, and the connection makes it certain
that a _moral_ resurrection is intended. Immediately preceding the
text, Jesus says, “As the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth
them; even so, the Son quickeneth whom he will.” There is here a
comparison between what God was doing, and what Christ was doing.
God was raising the dead from mortality to immortality, and Jesus
was raising the morally dead and quickening them by his spirit. He
continues to speak of the moral resurrection he was then effecting:
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth
on him that sent me, _hath_ everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation; but is passed from death unto life.” Those whom Christ
had quickened by the truth were in possession of “everlasting life,”
had actually “passed from death to life”--of course, no other than
a moral resurrection is intended. He continues: “Verily, I say unto
you, The hour is coming, and NOW IS, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live.” Sinners, the
morally dead, were then hearing his voice and coming forth to life.
This is NOW going on, said Jesus. Then he adds: “Marvel not at this:
for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and they shall come forth; they that have done good,
unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation.” The connection decides that Jesus was
speaking of the moral resurrection he was then effecting among the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. During Christ’s ministry the gospel was
proclaimed only to the Jews, and they only came forth and were blessed
by its quickening power; but soon the gospel was to be preached to
“all nations,” “to every creature.” Said Jesus to the disciples, just
before he returned to God, “Go ye into all the world and preach the
gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned.” Mark xvi. 15, 16.
This is the same subject spoken of in my text. When the disciples went
into the world in obedience to their master, they found mankind dead
in trespasses and sins, buried in the graves of moral degradation,
even in the dust of the earth. They preached the gospel to the dead
nations--some who heard it, came forth to life, to salvation, entered
the kingdom of God, which is righteousness, joy and peace in the holy
spirit. Others, who heard it, came forth to condemnation, and this
is explained thus: “He that believeth not shall be damned;” “He that
doubteth IS damned;” “HAVING damnation because they cast off their
first faith;” “He that believeth not is condemned ALREADY.” Similar
results have followed the proclamation of the truth in all ages and
climes. Let the truth be proclaimed fully and plainly in an ignorant
and vicious community, and some with joy will receive it, and partake
of its blessedness; others will rise up in opposition to it, condemn
it, and wax worse and worse.

This was the substance of the discourse, but much more was said in
defense of the various points here briefly stated. Mr. O’Kane replied,
but I have room for only one of his criticisms.

“The speaker said, that in the immortal resurrection, the dead are
not said to be raised from the _graves_, and hence in John v. 28, 29,
Christ does not speak of such a resurrection, for he there tells us,
that the dead shall be raised from the graves. Now, it happens, that
in the very chapter the gentleman informs us teaches the immortal
resurrection, the apostle Paul does teach that the dead on that
occasion will be raised from the _grave_. ‘So,’ says he, ‘when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting?
O _grave_, where is thy victory?’ Now which is correct, Mr. Manford or
the apostle Paul, for they contradict each other.”

I replied, Mr. O’Kane has my thanks for pointing out what he deems
an error in my discourse. The word _graves_ in John v. 28, is from
_muemeia_, which signifies grave, the receptacle of dead bodies, but
the word _grave_ in Corinthians, is from _hades_, which means, not
the grave, but the state of the dead. The meaning of the two terms
are very different. One signifying the _place_ where dead bodies are
deposited, but the other, the state of the dead. Now the body is not
buried in _hades_, but it is buried in _muemeia_, and at the immortal
resurrection the dead come not from _muemeia_, but from _hades_, the
state of death. My remark then was strictly correct, that at the
immortal resurrection nothing is said about the dead being raised from
the grave, _muemeia_. The state of the dead is designated by _hades_,
and that state or condition may continue but a moment. The term has no
reference to time or place, but merely to death. When a person dies,
his condition is represented by _hades_, and when the spirit returns
to God, it is delivered from _hades_, meaning the state of death. When
the spirit ascends to God, it can exclaim, “Death is swallowed up in
victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
Thanks be to God who giveth us the victory.” “Victory, victory,
victory!” they exclaim, as they burst the shackles of _hades_, or
the state of the dead, and join the immortal band in the land of the
blessed.

I delivered two discourses in West Lebanon, and spent most of one
day in conversation with Mr. Cooper, a Methodist minister. Said
Mr. Cooper, “You say, forever and everlasting in the Bible signify
limited duration. The Bible speaks of the ‘everlasting God,’ and the
‘everlasting life’ of the saints. Now, according to your definition of
these words, God will exist only for a limited period, and the redeemed
in heaven will exist only for a limited period. Your definition
dethrones God, and blots out heaven.”

“Not so fast, my friend. True, the primary meaning of those words
is duration, indefinite duration, but how long cannot be determined
by the words, but by the subjects of discourse. When the Bible
speaks of the ‘everlasting hills,’ ‘everlasting priesthood of Aaron,’
‘the everlasting possession’ of Judea by the Jews, ‘the everlasting
doors’ of the temple, ‘the servant serving his master forever,’ you
readily admit that those words in those places mean limited time. You
admit this, because the subjects of discourse are limited in their
duration. But when those words are applied to God, and man’s immortal
inheritance, they signify unlimited duration, because of the subjects
to which they are applied. But why should everlasting and forever, when
applied to punishment, bear the meaning they do when related to God and
immortal life, rather than the signification they bear when applied to
the priesthood, the hills, or the temple?”

“I admit, that when those words are applied to man in _this world_,
they signify limited time, but when the Bible speaks of man being
punished forever, and suffering everlasting punishment in the _immortal
world_, they must mean the same they do when it speaks of the
everlasting blessedness of the saints in heaven, and joys forevermore
at God’s right hand. Take, for instance, the words of Christ, ‘These
shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life
eternal.’ Now this life and this punishment pertain to the immortal
world, and one will continue as long as the other.”

“But it is by no means certain, that Jesus refers to heaven or hell
beyond the grave. The connection clearly shows, that Christ had
reference to the blessedness of the subjects of the gospel kingdom,
and the wretchedness of those out of that kingdom, out of the ark of
safety. In the connection of the passage, he says, ‘Come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world.’ The life spoken of in your text is the life, the
blessedness of this kingdom, and the New Testament certainly teaches,
that the kingdom is established in this world. When John commenced
his ministry he said, ‘Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand.’
When Jesus began his work, he repeated what John had said before him,
‘Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand.’ Soon after this Jesus
said, ‘If I cast out devils by the spirit of God, then the kingdom of
God is come unto you.’ Again said Jesus, ‘The law and the prophets
were until John; since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and
every man presseth into it.’ Near the close of our Lord’s ministry the
Pharisees inquired of him when the kingdom would come, which he and
John sometime before said was at hand. Now, observe his reply: ‘Neither
shall ye say, lo here, or lo there, for behold the kingdom of God is
within you,’ or about, or among you, as some, and very correctly,
translate the passage. The apostle Paul defines this kingdom thus: ‘The
kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, joy and peace
in the holy spirit.’ These citations inform us where and what this
kingdom is. It is the kingdom of truth and righteousness, that Jesus
built up in this world eighteen hundred years ago. It is called the
kingdom of God because its principles are all divine; because the Son
of God is its king, and to distinguish it from the political kingdoms
of earth. In this world there are three kingdoms, and three lifes
corresponding with those kingdoms: 1st, The kingdom of nature; and the
life corresponding with it is physical life; 2d, The civil kingdom; and
the life corresponding with it is political, or civil life; 3d, The
kingdom of God, and its life is spiritual life. You perceive, then,
that in the passage you cite, Jesus refers not to heaven or hell beyond
the grave, but to the blessedness of that kingdom he labored to build
up in this world. When the New Testament speaks of the immortal world,
and heavenly blessedness, it employs different terms. When Jesus
speaks on those sublime themes, he says, ‘In the resurrection they
neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God
in heaven;’ and the apostle Peter calls immortality ‘An inheritance,
undefiled, and fadeth not away;’ and the apostle Paul says, ‘This
mortal shall put on immortality, and as we bear the image of the earthy
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.’ Remember then, that
a future state of joy or sorrow was not the theme of Jesus on this
occasion.”

“But, sin, according to the Bible, will continue as long as virtue,
misery as long as happiness, death as long as life, and therefore
forever and everlasting when applied to one class must mean as long as
when applied to the other class.”

But my friend, are you sure, that sin, error, misery, and death, will
continue as long as virtue, truth, happiness, and life? I take it, that
nothing is immortal save what harmonizes with the divine character.
For a wise purpose, things may have a temporary existence, that are
antagonistic to God’s character. They may answer some useful end in the
economy of the universe; but when that end shall be gained, they will
disappear. The earthquake rends the earth, the lightnings flash, the
storm howls, the rain falls, for useful purposes, and those attained,
they cease; and their temporary existence, as they result in immense
good, is reconcilable with infinite goodness. But an everlasting
earthquake from pole to pole, eternal lightning, blowing and raining,
would be antagonistic to infinite wisdom and goodness. So, moral storms
and earthquakes answer a useful purpose in this world, and when that
end shall be realized, they will cease. But the existence of sin and
wrong eternally would conflict more with the wisdom and goodness of
God, than everlasting temporal evils, as the former blast the soul,
while the latter only blast the body. As earthquakes are less frequent
than they were in the past ages, and now seldom do much harm, and
will probably continue to diminish, and finally cease to rend the
earth, so moral evil is slowly losing its sway, and its strength will
doubtless continue to grow less and less, till righteousness shall
cover the earth as the waters cover the deep. By beautiful analogies
we are taught in the Bible, that all sin and wrong will end. “And it
shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth
in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written
among the living in Jerusalem: when the Lord shall have washed away
the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the
spirit of burning. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place
of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and
the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall
be a defense.” Isa. iv. 3-5. “The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb,
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young
lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.
And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down
together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking
child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put
his hand on the cockatrice’ den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in
all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.” Isa. xi. 6-9. “For my thoughts
are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher
than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. For as the rain
cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but
watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give
seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: so shall my word be that
goeth forth out of my mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it
shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it. For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with
peace; the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into
singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. Instead
of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the briar shall
come up the myrtle tree; and it shall be to the Lord for a name, for an
everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.” Isa. lv. 8-13. These are
elegant passages, perfect word-painting, and you see they teach the end
of all wrong, and the universal reign of truth and all righteousness.

About this time I made a long journey south--down the Wabash river to
Terre Haute, thence to Indianapolis, Richmond, Madison, and the Green
River region, in Kentucky. The distance to and from was nine hundred
miles, was absent three months, and delivered seventy-three sermons.
The whole journey was performed by my favorite mode of locomotion--on
horseback. I spoke in many places where the faith I advocated had
not before been publicly defended, and, of course, met with much
opposition. In Portland, a preacher in the midst of my sermon said,
“That is a lie!” and left the house in a great rage. “Stop!” said I,
“my friend, and sustain, if you can, your charge. I will yield the
floor.” “I will have nothing to do with you; and I warn you to flee
from the wrath to come.” In Boston, near Richmond, an old lady called
aloud for eggs with which to shower me. But none were furnished. In
Perrysville, an old toper went staggering out of the house, muttering,
“It’s good to live by, but it’s not good to die by.”

In Shelbyville, a man at the close of a discourse remarked, that he
could see no good reason for living a christian life if Universalism is
true.

“My friend,” I replied, “will you answer me a few questions? If you
were sure of heaven would you put out your eyes? run hot lead into your
ears? Would you not rather wish to see and hear in this world?”

“Yes.”

“If you were sure of being saved, would you not eat when hungry, and
drink when thirsty?”

“Yes.”

“If you were certain of going to heaven, would you not love your wife,
children, father, mother, brother and sister?”

“Yes.”

“If you expected to go to heaven when you die, when you are sick would
you not want to recover?”

“Yes.”

“If you were sure of being a happy man next year, would you not want to
be happy this year?”

“Yes.”

“If you were certain of enjoying good health in old age, would you not
like to have good health now?”

“Yes.”

“If you were sure of being a true Christian ten years hence, would you
not desire to be a Christian this year?”

“Yes.”

“My friend, you have answered your own question as I would, and as any
one would, save a fool. If eternal life is to be our portion in the
other world, we should lay hold of it in _this world_. If a heavenly
feast awaits us on the other side of the river, why not partake of the
heavenly feast on _this side_? But this, I suppose, puzzles you; you
think the Christian is no better off in this world than the sinner;
that he treads a thorny path, and is crushed by a heavy yoke, hence the
question, Why live a christian life, if after all, I am sure of heaven?
The truth is, the good man, and only the good man, is truly blessed in
this world. He enjoys heaven _now_ in anticipation of one beyond the
grave. This blissful hope transforms his character into the heavenly
image. But there is another reason why we should live Christians if
heaven is sure. ‘Godliness hath the promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come.’ He who lives a godly life is not only
well paid for it in this world, but he enters the other world with
_capabilities_ for happiness far exceeding that man who spends this
life in sin and folly. This is an important consideration. There are
then, at least, two reason why we should be Christians in this world
if God has promised that all shall finally be redeemed. 1st, We are
happier in this world for it; 2d, We shall be happier in the next world
for it.”

In Breckenridge, Ky., bigotry would not allow me to speak in defense of
the truth. One preacher took special pains to have every door closed
against me, but sin only triumphed for a season; for when I returned
a house was obtained, and I delivered a long sermon on the sin of
bigotry. Showed that it was the same thing the world over, in all ages
and climes, in christian and heathen lands; that it was as cruel as
an hyena, bloody as a wolf, and remorseless as a tiger; that it had
drenched the earth with gore, and covered its surface with the slain
of human kind; that it had slain Jesus, the prophets and apostles, and
was still at its wicked work; and the only reason why bigots are not
now crucifying, beheading, hanging, quartering and burning the saints
of the Lord was, the laws of the land will not let them indulge in such
amusements, but they were doing all they _dare_ do--they were stabbing
character, suppressing free thought, and persecuting the saints of God.
I considerably extended my acquaintance by this journey, and obtained
many subscribers for the _Teacher_.

Soon after my return, I had a debate with Mr. Dickerson, of Park
county, Ind. He was a Scotch Presbyterian--a Calvinist, and the bluest
of the blue. He contended stoutly, that all God wills to save, and
that Christ died for, will be saved; but, said he, God wills to save
only the elect, and Christ died only for the elect, and he supposed
that they compose about one tenth of mankind. In one of my speeches, I
remarked:

Mr. Dickerson comes out plainly, boldly, independently, in favor of
old-fashioned Calvinism. He has no faith in the modern improvements of
Calvinism; he takes it as it flowed from the pen of John Calvin. He
tells us, that God _wills_, _purposes_ the salvation of only _part_ of
mankind. If he is correct, it seems to me, the Bible needs revising,
for it certainly teaches that it is the will and purpose of God that
all mankind shall be saved. The apostle Paul expressly says, “God will
have _all men_ to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.”
1 Tim. ii. 4. “Having made known unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he hath purposed in himself; that
in the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together
in one _all things_ in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are
on earth; even in him.” Eph. i. 9, 10. In these passages the purpose
of God in the creation of man is clearly revealed. It is his will,
pleasure and purpose to save _all_, to bless _all_ in Christ. Does
_all_ mean _part_? Is the Bible a riddle? If so, let us finish the
riddle by saying virtue means vice, truth error, happiness misery, love
hatred, life death, salvation damnation, heaven hell, Christ Belial,
and God means devil. This would be carrying out the interpretation
Calvinism gives the Bible. How a man, standing in the midst of God’s
works, and with the Bible in his hand, can for a moment assert, that
the Author of all these glories all around, can will and purpose
the eternal wretchedness of nine tenths of mankind, is a problem of
intellectual blindness I cannot solve. Before I can subscribe to such
a creed my reason must be destroyed, my conscience deadened, my eyes
put out, my ears stopped, and my heart become as hard as adamant. The
gentleman says, this is an evidence of my carnal mindness; and if I
could see with spiritual eyes--he must mean Calvin’s eyes, the eyes
that beheld Michael Servetus, burning on a pile of green wood--I should
be charmed with the beauties of Calvinism.

2. It was the mission of Jesus to do the will and purpose of God, and
I have proved that it is God’s will and purpose to save the world--not
one here and there--but the world. Hence the joyous language of the
angels when they announced his birth: “Fear not: for behold, I bring
you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to _all people_. For
unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude
of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.” Luke ii. 10, 11,
13, 14. This language does not comport at all with the theory that it
was the mission of Jesus to bless only _one tenth_ of mankind. John,
directing attention to Jesus, said, “Behold the Lamb of God, which
taketh away the sin of _the world_.” John i. 29. Said Jesus, concerning
his mission, “And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw _all
men_ to me.” John xii. 32. The apostles understood it to be the mission
of Jesus to save the world--not one tenth of our race. “We have seen
and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of _the
world_.” 1 John iv. 14. “He gave himself a ransom for _all_, to be
testified in due time.” 1 Tim. ii. 6. “And he is the propitiation for
our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of _the whole
world_.” 1 John ii. 2. “And, having made peace through the blood of his
cross, by him to reconcile _all things_ unto himself; by him, I say,
whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.” Col. i. 20. “God
was in Christ, reconciling _the world_ unto himself.” 2 Cor. v. 19. But
why cite more testimony? I could fill my hour with quotations from the
New Testament, showing that Christ’s mission was not a partial one, but
that it embraced all the sons and daughters of earth. He was born the
Savior of the world, and he lived, died, arose, ascended, and still is,
the Savior of the world. That truth corresponds with his spirit, his
labors, his moral precepts, his principles and his prayers. Calvinism
crucifies the true Christ, and sets up an impostor, an anti-christ, in
his stead. It also denies the true God, and substitutes a monster.

This speech kindled the ire of Mr. Dickerson. He denounced me in
unmeasured terms, and marshaled all his strength in defense of
Calvinism. He was familiar with its strongest arguments, and he paraded
them to the best advantage. He said Universalism is Arminianism gone
to seed, and he denounced both systems with much bitterness. This led
me to remark--I believe in all the truth there is in Arminianism and
Calvinism, and there is some truth in both systems. Calvinism says,
that all God wills to save will surely be saved--not one lost. Very
good; I can say, amen to that. Arminianism says, that God wills the
salvation of _all_. Very good; I can say, amen to that. I will put
these two truths, and the sequence from them, in the form of a sylogism:

1. Arminianism--It is God’s will, that all men shall be saved.

2. Calvinism--God’s will shall be done.

3. Conclusion--All will be saved.

I cast aside the dross of Calvinism and Arminianism, and retain the
pure gold of both systems.

He pitched into my sylogism rough shod, and in reply, I gave him
several from the Bible.

1. It is the will of God that all men shall be saved. Proof: “Who will
have all men to be saved.” 1 Tim. ii. 4.

2. God’s will is to be done. Proof: “He doeth according to his will in
the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none
can stay his hand, or say unto him, what doest thou?” Dan. iv. 35. “He
doeth all things after the council of his own will.” Eph. i. 11.

3. Conclusion--All will be saved.

1. God purposes the salvation of all men. Proof: Eph. i. 9, 10, above
quoted.

2. God’s purpose will be effected. Proof: “As I have purposed so shall
it stand--for the Lord hath purposed, and who shall disannul it?” Isa.
xiv. 24, 27. “I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have
purposed it, I will also do it.” Isa. xlvi. 11.

3. Conclusion--All will be saved.

1. All were given to Christ. Proof: “Thou has given him power over all
flesh, that he may give eternal life to as many as thou has given him.”
John xvii. 2.

2. All shall be saved who were given to Christ. Proof: “All that the
Father giveth me shall come to me, and he that cometh to me I will in
no wise cast away.” John vi. 37.

3. Conclusion--All will be blessed with eternal life.

About this time, I held an oral discussion in Chambersburg, Fountain
county, with a Baptist minister--have forgotten his name. I arrived
in due time, but my opponent did not make his appearance. There was
a large assembly, in a beautiful grove; and after waiting about one
hour, another minister took his place, and the discussion proceeded.
He made one speech, and while I was replying the expected man made
his appearance. When I was through he proposed, that each of us make
one speech, and then close the debate; but I insisted that we should
occupy two days according to agreement. He was rather a weak brother;
but he knew the book of Revelation from A to izzard, and all the
other mysterious portions of the Bible. He could tell how deep was
the “bottomless pit,” how large was the “red dragon,” how big was
his “head,” “horns,” and “crown;” could give the exact length of his
“tail,” that cast to earth the “third part of the stars of heaven.” He
was deeply versed in all that kind of lore, but drank shallow draughts
of useful knowledge or common sense. But a large number attended the
discussion, and I had an excellent opportunity to talk to the people.




CHAPTER X.


  MOVED TO TERRE HAUTE--LECTURED IN FORT WAYNE--A DISCUSSION
  THERE--DR. THOMPSON--VISITED ILLINOIS--OPPOSITION--DISCUSSION
  IN CHARLESTON--PRAYED FOR--CALLED INFIDEL--DEBATE IN GREEN
  CASTLE--CONDITIONS OF SALVATION--GOD’S WILL--ALL ARE SPIRITS--FORM
  OF THE TEACHER CHANGED--J. BURT AND J. H. JORDAN, EDITORS--OLIVER
  CROMWELL--FOUNDATION OF CHARACTER--IN MANY PLACES--A
  CELEBRATION--MEETING IN THE RAIN--FOURTH OF JULY CELEBRATION--DEBATE
  IN MARTINSVILLE.

In 1843, I moved the _Teacher_ to Terre Haute, ninety miles down the
Wabash river, as I deemed that place a better location than Lafayette
for its publication. Also made that town my head-quarters. The country
north and west of Lafayette, in those days, was thinly settled, but in
the southern portion of the state, there was a denser population, hence
a better field in which to circulate the _Teacher_. I still continued
my monthly circuit on both sides of the Wabash river, from Terre Haute
to Lafayette, preaching in twenty different places. B. F. Foster was
pastor of the Terre Haute society, and a meeting-house was being
erected in that place. But soon my services were so urgently demanded
west and south of Terre Haute, that I dropped some of the places on the
circuit, and supplied the wants of friends elsewhere. I did so with
much reluctance, as there was no one to take my place. There were then
thirteen societies within that circuit where there was not one when I
first visited that region, and one meeting-house was finished, and two
being built.

At the earnest solicitation of Dr. Thompson, of Fort Wayne, I visited
that place, and delivered a series of discourses. These were the first
sermons on the Restitution ever delivered in that town, and they
caused much excitement. An Episcopal clergyman proposed debating with
me, and we accordingly spent two days in discussion. The assemblies
were large, and, I trust, much good was effected. Dr. Thompson was a
prominent citizen of Fort Wayne, and an intellectual and christian man.
Three years after, while a candidate for Congress, he died, lamented
universally where he was known. While on that journey, I preached in
Huntington, Wabash, Peru, and several other places, where Universalism
was hardly ever heard of before.

I took a trip westward into Illinois, and preached in Elbridge,
Paris, Grand View, Brewetts’ Creek, Bloomfield, Oakland, Charleston,
Shelbyville, Cold Springs, Marshall and Greenup. In not one of these
places had the people heard a discourse in defense of “the restitution
of all things,” and, of course, my preaching was a great curiosity.
In Paris, a minister lifted up his warning voice, but would not let
me occupy his house to reply. He wanted his people to hear his side
only. I, however, made an _expose_ of his sermon in the Court-house, to
a large assembly, and obtained a large number of subscribers for the
_Teacher_. In Oakland, I found some excellent friends, and subsequently
preached there monthly for two years. In Charleston, the meetings
stirred up sectarianism to its depths, and a preacher by the name of
Tichner dared me to debate with him. Not being badly frightened by his
bluster, I agreed to debate with him four days. The first proposition
was, “Immortal blessedness is conditional!”

In my first speech in the morning, I showed the result of the
position, that immortal blessedness is conditional in the sense Mr.
Tichner intended. If he is correct, I remarked, but a small portion
of mankind will ever partake of that blessedness. 1. All children,
dying in childhood, are lost, as they comply, in this world, with no
conditions. 2. Idiots neither believe nor obey the gospel in this
world--comply with no conditions here--and will never, consequently,
partake of immortal blessedness. 3. All who lived and died before
Christ’s advent, complied with no gospel condition, hence all those
countless millions are lost--forever lost. 4. Pagans, Jews, Mahometans,
since Christ’s day, have all gone down to their graves, without faith
in Christ or the gospel, and therefore they are all lost beyond
redemption. My friend is a Campbellite, and will not admit that any
comply with gospel conditions, who are not immersed in water--down
then goes Catholics, Methodists, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, yea,
all who are not immersed. If he is correct, only one here and there
will be saved, while the mass of mankind, nearly all, will be doomed to
suffer immortal agony, for one of his propositions affirms the endless
punishment of the unsaved. The gentleman may not believe all this--I
cannot say how that is--but I am dealing with his proposition; and it
involves the ruin of nearly all mankind. I once heard him deliver a
sermon on the conditions of salvation, and in that discourse he did
not intimate that one could be saved without immersion. His creed
unchurches all but his little sect, and sends all to perdition but his
party.

He had another speech to make before adjournment, and he occupied only
half of his allotted time, but said not a word about what I had shown
to be the result of his proposition. In my reply, I called attention
to my former speech, and to the fact that no attempt had been made to
refute it, and remarked, that the gentleman must either show that my
deductions are false, or abandon his proposition. He must do one or the
other. He dared me to debate with him, boasted that he would annihilate
my faith the first day before noon, and many of his friends are here
to see him do it. We adjourned till two o’clock in the afternoon. Met
according to adjournment. Mr. Tichner and his friends were in trouble.
They knew not what to do. They saw that I had their man in my grasp,
and meant to hold him. I looked on, but said nothing. Finally, one
of his brethren came to me, and admitted that I had the advantage of
brother Tichner, and wished me to release him. The preacher looked
blue; he did not know which way to turn. I pitied him, and proposed
that we drop the first proposition, which we were to debate two days,
and take up the second proposition--“Will all mankind enjoy immortal
blessedness?” He readily consented, and the discussion then went on.
Mr. Tichner and his friends were much mortified at the result of
the debate. He soon ceased preaching, went to California, and made
shipwreck of his faith and character.

I lectured in Greenup; and while there, a preacher prayed the Lord,
either to convert the Universalists, or send them to hell, and he did
not seem to care which disposition was made of them. A Presbyterian
minister in Grand View, delivered a labored sermon against “Infidelity
in all its forms,” and, of course, “the grace of God which bringeth
salvation to all men,” was one of its worst “forms.” “That phase of
infidelity,” said he, “is the best baited of the whole batch. Read not
their books, their papers, their _Teacher_--hear not their preachers,
talk not on that subject with any of the believers in that damnable
system. Pray for them, but don’t talk with them. It is a heresy hot
from hell, and have nothing to do with it.” A Methodist divine in
Shelbyville, gave notice that he would, the Lord permitting, preach
a sermon against Universalism, the next Sunday. But notwithstanding
this opposition, I thanked God and took courage. Many rejoiced in the
testimony they heard, and resolved that their lives should correspond
with the purity of their new faith.

Being in Green Castle, Ind., I heard a discourse by James Mathes,
concerning the conditions of salvation, and at its close, I delivered,
at his request, a short sermon. Without controverting any of his
positions, I attempted to show, that all mankind would finally comply
with gospel conditions of salvation. When I got through, he proposed
a debate on the subject of my discourse. In due time we met in Green
Castle, and devoted two days to the investigation of that subject.
Mr. Mathes was, and still is, a prominent man in his denomination. He
said in the discussion, “There are three conditions of salvation: 1st,
Faith; 2d, Baptism; 3d, Repentance. He, and he only, who complies with
these conditions, is entitled to salvation.”

I answered, If the gentleman on the other side is correct, but a small
squad of mankind will be saved, for he earnestly denies, that any one
can comply with one of the conditions named, in the other world. We
must believe, repent, be immersed in this world, or be lost forever;
no opportunity for salvation will be granted beyond the grave; God’s
mercy is confined to this life, but his vengeance will extend through
eternity; his mercy is only the evanescent spark of a flint, but
his wrath will burn forever; this life is only the infancy of our
existence, but his creed makes it the hinge on which our destiny turns;
now, man is a moral agent, but death will destroy that agency, and he
will be compelled to lie down in sin and darkness through the eternal
ages; death bounds God’s mercy--beyond it, the righteous will need
no mercy, and the wicked will be allowed none. I cannot subscribe to
such a partial, malignant and cruel creed. I believe in conditions of
salvation, and that a soul will never be deprived of complying with
those conditions. The conditions, in sum and substance, are, knowledge
of the truth, and love to God, and love to man; and no one can be
saved in this world or in the next world without that knowledge and
love. That is the strait and narrow way; there is no other way to be
saved in time or eternity. True, all do not possess that knowledge, or
exercise that love in this world, but as the light and heat of the sun
are not confined to this world, but extend to all the worlds in the
solar system, so God’s mercy is not exhausted on earth, but extends to
all time, and to all worlds.

It is certainly God’s will that all shall be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth. (1 Tim. ii. 4.) The gentleman, though, denies
that truth in toto. True, he admits, that it is God’s will that you,
and I, and all who now live on earth, shall be saved, but he contends
that all the sons of error and sin, as soon as they leave this world,
are deprived of all power, of all opportunity, to reform their lives,
and must lie down in sin and error eternally. But mark the text, “God
will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.”
It is God’s will now that all shall be saved. God is unchangeable; he
is the same yesterday, to-day and forever. Men may change their will,
purpose, but his will, his purpose, is the same through all time,
through all eternity. It was God’s will six thousand years ago, that
all should be saved; it is God’s will now that all shall be saved; it
will be God’s will six thousand years hence, yea, through the eternal
ages, that all men shall be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth. As it is God’s will now, that all shall be saved, all are now
capable of salvation--none are reprobated, none are cast away; and as
it always will be God’s will that all shall be saved, all ever will be
capable of salvation--none will be reprobated, none cast away. What is
true of God’s nature, character, and will now, ever will be true of
God’s nature, character and will, hence the golden gates of salvation
ever will be open to mankind. We read that the heavenly city has gates
all around it, on the east, west, north and south, and that they are
never shut by day or by night.

I know it is a very common notion, and Mr. Mathes preaches it, that
the ignorant and vicious will have no opportunity to become wiser or
better in the other world; that as they breathe their last breath, and
heave their last sigh, they will be compelled to remain forever. And to
prove this monstrous dogma, I have heard persons repeat such home-made
texts as these: “As the tree falls so it shall lie;” “As death leaves
us, so judgment finds us;” “If you die in your sins, where I go ye
cannot come.” I need not inform you, that these are all spurious
texts. Perhaps it will be asked, does not the Bible say, “There is no
repentance in the grave?” Nothing of the kind is in the Good Book.
And even if it were there it would not contradict my position. What
is in the grave? Nothing but the body, and that cannot repent, in the
grave or out of it, dead or alive. Where is the spirit when the body
is mouldering in the grave? The wise man informs us, “Dust returns
to dust as it was, and the spirit returns to God who gave it.” This
is the destiny of _all_. The body is from the earth, the spirit from
God, and when the copartnership between the body and the spirit are
dissolved, the body descends, and the spirit ascends; the one to
its mother-earth, and the other to its Father-God. Man is a spirit;
Christ and the apostles talked to spirits; I am addressing spirits;
all revelation--its precepts and promises--are addressed to spirits;
and when the great Gentile apostle said, “God will have all men to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth,” he was speaking of all
spirits, whether in this world or in the eternal world, whether in the
body, or in the house not made with hands. I repeat, wherever a spirit
exists _unsaved_, it is God’s will that he shall be saved, and God will
even work in all to will and to do his pleasure.

Mr. Mathes admits, that it is God’s will that sinners shall be saved
while they are in this world, but he contends that it is his will
that sinners in the spirit world shall _not_ be saved. Now why this
difference? Why is it God’s will that I shall now be saved, and at the
same time his will that I shall not be saved beyond the grave, if I
should there need salvation? Is not reformation of character a good
thing any where and every where? I take it, that God’s government is
the same in all worlds, and at all times. It is perfect, and therefore
uniform and unchangeable. He now requires all, and ever will require
all, to learn the truth, and walk in the ways of life, and therefore he
never will _compel_ a soul to lie down in sin, darkness and death, one
moment, in time or eternity.

When the third volume of the _Teacher_ commenced, it was changed to a
quarto form, and issued semi-monthly, instead of monthly; and James
Burt and J. H. Jordan, became associate editors. Mr. Burt was recently
from the East, where he had preached several years. He was a good
writer, and a worthy man. He was connected with the paper one year,
when his name, at his request, was dropped, and he ceased preaching.
Mr. Jordan was not a minister, but a school teacher. He subsequently
became a physician, and at the present time, is editor and publisher of
the Indianapolis (Ind.) _Gazette_, a daily and weekly paper, conducted
with vigor and ability. He wields a strong pen, and is an influential
writer. For several years, Dr. Jordan assisted me in issuing the
_Teacher_, and his contributions were always perused with much interest.

I opened a new field about this time, in the southern part of Indiana.
Lectured in Bowling Green. Oliver Cromwell resided there--a descendant
of England’s great Protector. He was an aged man, intelligent, and an
ardent defender of the liberal faith. He said the Protector was his
great-great grandfather.

A zealous Methodist class leader tried to reply to one of my sermons.
“If your faith is correct, why all this labor? Why form societies,
build meeting-houses, support ministers, or try to serve the Lord in
any way?” I answered thus:

I understand from the gentleman’s remarks, that he supposes that the
fear of hell, and the hope of heaven, are the only reasons why we
should attend to the duties of life; and according to the confession
of sectarians generally, these are the moving causes of all their
christian efforts; hence their first and last objection to Universalism
is, that it removes all inducements to live a virtuous life. This
degrading objection is in the mouth of nearly all, from the doctor of
divinity to the most humble member. If we take them at their word,
they organize churches, build meeting-houses, employ ministers, send
missionaries to the heathen, to escape hell and reach heaven; they
pray, preach, attend meetings, go among the heathen, to escape hell and
reach heaven; they deal justly, love mercy, and walk humbly before God,
to escape hell and reach heaven. According to their own confession,
these are the only motives that urge them onward in their christian
course. Now, this is all wrong; they build on a false, dangerous
foundation; they build on the sand; they are influenced, governed
solely by selfish considerations. They work for pay, and pay they will
have or turn rebels. Piety with them is a ticket past hell into heaven.
Now, this is a wretched foundation for a christian life. In truth,
character built on such a basis, is hay, wood and stubble, and liable
to be consumed at any moment, hence so much back-sliding among Orthodox
church members. They stand on slippery places.

Universalism lays a better foundation, presents better motives for
living a christian life. It makes a _reasonable_ appeal to man’s hopes
and fears, but its strong foundation is in _principle_. It teaches that
we should revere the truth, and practice righteousness, because we
love truth and righteousness; should love God and man because of the
goodness of God and the goodness in man; be truthful because we love
the truth, and deal justly with our fellow men because we love justice
and righteousness. When character is built on such a foundation, it is
as permanent as the everlasting hills. It takes time to form character
of this kind, but when the work is done, it is well done. Such persons
do not need conversion at every camp-meeting in their county.

Lectured in Spencer, Gosport, Bloomington, Martinsville, Morgantown,
Franklin, Columbus and Nashville. In all these places the liberal faith
had not before been preached. But I found in most of them an elect few
who had long cherished it amid all sorts of opposition. Faithful souls!
They were true to their convictions, though standing alone, targets
for bigots to shoot at. In Bloomington I lectured several times, and
a minister tried to point out my errors, as he termed the noblest
and most glorious of truths. Mr. Labertew, a merchant, and zealous
friend, resided there. He subsequently built a meeting-house at his own
expense; but there not being sufficient number of believers to act with
him in keeping up meetings, he sold it. Held a meeting in Gosport; the
house was full, and several hundred were out of doors; and although the
rain poured down in torrents, they remained through the services. Here
I subsequently had many conflicts with those of the partial faith. Near
Nashville I attended a Fourth-of-July celebration. After the dinner
was over, and the patriotic speeches made, I gave the people a sermon.
Lectured in Martinsville in the Court-house; a clergyman replied, and
arrangements were made for me to have a debate in that place with Mr.
Scott, a Methodist presiding elder. It was to continue four days. He
had recently debated with J. Mathes, and coming out of it victorious,
all were sure he would make short work of me, and my faith. But they
were disappointed. Mr. Scott got mad, and left the rostrum, declaring
that he would discuss no more with me. But the moderators persuaded him
to continue the allotted time. After he got through, another minister
tried his hand at the work, but many thought he fared worse than his
predecessor. Weighing about two hundred and fifty pounds, and as fat as
butter, he kept in good humor. Lectured in Columbus and Franklin. In
both places I soon after had discussions. This was a laborious journey,
for it was war, war, from the beginning to the end of it.




CHAPTER XI.


  JOURNEY INTO NORTHERN ILLINOIS--TEMPERANCE LECTURE--RESULT OF
  TEMPERATE DRINKING--MARRIED--HOMEWARD BOUND--HIGH WATERS--DIFFICULT
  TRAVELING--TROUBLE IN CROSSING STREAMS--A COLD BATH--END OF
  THE “BRIDAL TOUR”--A HARD RIDE--DEBATES WITH E. KINGSBURY--IN
  NORTHERN INDIANA--CONVERSATION WITH AN INDIAN--DARK MAN AND DARK
  NIGHT--EXPLANATION OF HEBREWS IX. 27, 28--END OF THE WORLD--THE EARTH
  AND MAN.

In June, 1844, with buggy and two horses, I commenced a journey into
the northern part of Illinois. Preached in Newport, Ind., and became
acquainted with several devoted believers in the Restitution. Lectured
on temperance in Perrysville. Related the following sad story of a
family, educated to the “temperate use” of liquor:

The husband and father was wealthy, educated, and occupied a prominent
position in the community in which he resided. In his days of vigor,
he held important political and military stations; was an officer in
the last war with Great Britain, and after its termination, honorably
occupied a seat in the legislative hall of his native state. He was
what is called a “temperate drinker.” His children were instructed by
precept and example to be temperate drinkers. The decanters were ever
full of the choicest liquors, and all daily partook of the sparkling
beverage. All of them despised intemperance, and hated the sight
of a drunkard. The two sons married into families equal to their
own; and the daughter, an accomplished lady, was wedded to the man
of her choice. The father, with joy beheld his interesting family
settled around him, highly respected for their intellectual and moral
qualities, and bountifully blessed with the good things of this world.
He was comforted with the reflection that his declining years would be
blessed by virtuous children.

My informant, who had spent his childhood and youth in the town where
this family lived, after several years absence, returned to the home
of his early life. He repaired to the residence of the venerable man,
where he had spent many happy hours in bygone days. Enquired for
beloved names, for the sons and daughter, the associates of the morning
of his life. The aged father burst into tears; he wept aloud; he wrung
his hands with anguish. The tale was all horror that the trembling
lips of the old man related. The daughter had disgraced herself by
intemperance, and was mouldering in a premature grave. The two brothers
were ruined by rum-drinking. A short time before, the wife of one of
them, after enduring the brutal treatment of her husband for years, had
fled from him while he was in a drunken fit, and plunged into a pond,
and was drowned, to escape from wretchedness, and the monster. The wife
of the other had left him; she would no longer live with the brute. One
of the sons was at home, but intemperance had made him a cripple and
an idiot. The mother of the family had long since sunk into a welcome
grave, overwhelmed with sorrow. The father was descending with grief
into the grave. His expectations were blasted; his hopes were cut
off. His family, in which was centered his affections, and from whom
he expected support and consolation, were miserably destroyed--part
sunk into a dishonored grave, to hide their shame, and the remainder,
outcasts in the world.

The misfortunes of this family, in all probability, originated in
_temperate drinking_. The seed of sin and death was sown by the father,
while the children were under his roof. A taste for intoxicating drinks
was there acquired, and cultivated, and when they left home, they
continued to cherish it, till by degrees it became the ruling passion.
The parents and children reaped a fearful reward. What an awful sin
for parents thus to vitiate the taste of their children! Let them take
warning. They will as surely reap the reward of their evil doing, as
there is a God in heaven. For so great a sin to go unpunished nature’s
laws must be reversed.

Delivered two sermons in Rainsville. Urged my brethren to live as
becometh believers in the best religion ever entertained by men or
angels. It is all truth and righteousness, and our character and life
should be truthful and righteous. It is better to be an Orthodox
christian, than a Universalist sinner. We might as well be without the
knowledge of the truth, as to hold it in unrighteousness. The gospel
blesses those only who practice it; to such only it “is the power of
God unto salvation.” Had a meeting in Montgomery, Ill., and at the
close a Baptist preacher sung out a reply. It was decidedly funny. I
will not attempt to repeat it, for I cannot do justice to the subject.
Forded the Kankakee river where the city of Kankakee now stands, but
there was no city there then--nothing but a wild prairie. The river
was deep--deeper than I expected--and there was imminent danger of
horses, buggy, and all, being washed down stream. Some men on the shore
watched me with much interest, but they could have rendered me no
assistance if I had gotten into difficulty, as there was no boat near.
Lectured in Bourbonais Grove. It is a French village, and I put up with
the principal man of the settlement. He was a Catholic, but said he
believed what I preached.

On July 3d, in Wilmington, Ill., was married to Miss H. Bryant, by
Rev. W. H. Dean, of Joliet. This lady is a native of New York, and for
a year or two previous to this date, was one of the Principals of a
seminary in Warrenville, Ill. Left Wilmington with my charge, to return
to Terre Haute. But the windows of heaven opened, and the fountains
of the great deep were broken up. The summer of 1844 will long be
remembered in the West, as the summer of floods, tornadoes, thunder
and lightning. The whole country was inundated, and traveling was very
dangerous business. We came near being swept away, on crossing a rapid
stream, the first day of our journey. Arriving at the Kankakee river,
we found it past fording, and nothing but a small skiff with which
to cross the stream. The carriage was taken to pieces, and carried
over in parcels, and the horses swam the river. A few miles south we
encountered Beaver Creek--then a mighty river. Again the buggy was
ferried over by piece-meal, and the horses swam at the side of the
frail bark, I holding them by their heads. Every slough was a river,
which we had to ford or swim. A few miles from the Iroquois river,
when far from a house, a terrible storm burst on our heads. There was
no shelter, and for about one hour we were exposed to one of the most
violent storms I ever witnessed. The wind blew a tornado, the thunder
crashed fearfully, the lightning flashed sheets of fire, the rain and
hail poured down in torrents, and to add to the terror of the scene,
the trees came crashing to the ground, all around us. We finally
reached a house on the bank of the river, and were right glad to have
a roof between us and that wild elemental war. There we had to remain
several days, as it was impossible to proceed till the waters abated.
But I was very restless, as I had an engagement in Oakland, Ill., and
had barely time to reach there without any detention. I had agreed
to have a discussion in that place with E. Kingsbury, a Presbyterian
minister of Danville, but that last storm prevented my filling the
engagement.

The bridge across the Iroquois river being washed away by the flood,
the carriage was again taken to pieces, and ferried over, while the
horses swam to the opposite shore. But one of them came near drowning,
as he became entangled in the top of a tree that had drifted down; he
was finally rescued, and we were soon on the way to encounter more
trouble. Reached the Wabash river bottom, opposite Montezuma, and found
it all inundated--the water from one to three feet deep. When about
half way across, in attempting to cross a low place on a corduroy
bridge, all under water, and not visible, the water being so dirty,
we missed the middle of the corduroy, and carriage, horses, bride and
bridegroom, went over the side into the mud and water. The bride, a
perfect hero, stood in the mud and water three feet deep, holding
the frightened horses, while the bridegroom transferred the baggage
from the buggy to the trunk of a fallen tree, which happily was not
far distant. We finally got out of the slough, in a pretty bad plight
though, and crossed the river on to dry land, and the next day reached
Terre Haute--thus ended our _bridal tour_.

Mr. Kingsbury, named above, gave notice that he should deliver a
discourse near Oakland, against the doctrine of the Restitution, and
added, that he was willing I should reply, if I thought proper, at the
close of his sermon. I was in Covington, Ind., the day before he was
to deliver said discourse, and being detained in crossing the Wabash
river till near sundown, I rode most of the night, and reached the
appointed place a few minutes after he had dismissed his congregation.
I rode seventy miles, between four o’clock Thursday, and twelve o’clock
Friday, without any refreshment, and with about two hours rest. The
congregation was called together. Mr. Kingsbury furnished me notes of
his sermon, and I spoke two hours in reply. He replied, and I spoke
another hour. We subsequently spent four days in discussion in Oakland.
Mr. Kingsbury not being perfectly satisfied with his effort proposed a
written debate. He agreed to furnish twelve letters for the _Teacher_.
He wrote five, and then gave up the controversy.

I again visited Northern Indiana; and even extended my journey into
Michigan, preaching wherever I could gather a congregation. Had some
conversation with an intelligent Indian near Peru, on the Upper Wabash.

“I no believe in your Bible, or your Jesus Christ--not a word of it.”

“Well, my friend, do you believe in a God, and a hereafter?”

“That I do. I believe in the Great Spirit, and that he will take good
care of all his children. No man ever killed him, as your Bible says,
man killed God. He is away beyond the reach of arrow or cross. Who
brought God to life if he was killed? You tell if you can.”

“The Bible does not say that God was slain. He is a Great Spirit, and
in him we all live, move and have our being. You say truly, that man
cannot harm him. Jesus Christ was not God, but rather a divine man; and
he was sent here by the Great Spirit to instruct us in wisdom’s ways.
But do you not think God has sent prophets to this world to instruct
his children?”

“I do. My nation has had prophets. They taught us to use the bow and
arrow; and how to raise corn, potatoes, and tobacco. We bless the Great
Spirit for those prophets.”

“God is no respecter of persons. He has sent other nations prophets,
and Jesus Christ is one of the wisest and best he ever gave the world.
He taught that God is a spirit, and that we should worship him in
spirit and in truth; that we are all his children; that he loves all,
is good to all, and ever will be the Father and friend of man. Do you
object to that?”

“All good, but the missionaries no talk so. They say Jesus is God, and
that he was killed to save man from his own wrath. I no understand
such stuff, and I no want to. I no believe God is mad, or that he was
killed to be made good-natured.”

“We perfectly agree on that subject. If you will examine the New
Testament, you will find that it teaches that Jesus Christ was a
prophet of the Great Spirit, and that he was sent to this world to tell
us how to live. He came not to quench the wrath of God, or to put out
the fires of hell, but to direct our wayward feet in the path of life
and salvation. His is a glorious work, and we are assured he will do it
well. Your nation has likely had prophets, but acquaint yourself with
this one ere you reject him.”

“You tell me new things. I will read the New Testament.”

The country south of Fort Wayne is flat, wet, and in those days
was covered with a dense forest, and the settlers’ cabins were far
apart--in some places, miles apart. I remember, when on this journey,
of traveling a whole day without passing more than half a dozen houses.
It was a dark, gloomy, foggy, rainy autumnal day, and the roads were
in a wretched condition, in many places nearly impassable, the mud and
water being so deep. When it was nearly dark, I met an ugly looking
fellow, with a gun on his shoulder; and while inquiring of him about
the road, I heard a distant noise, which seemed to be from some one in
distress. I called his attention to it, and proposed that we ascertain
what was the matter. He seemed to take no interest in the subject, and
walked off in the opposite direction. I told him he was an inhuman
creature, and that I should try to learn who was making that noise,
for some body was surely in trouble; and immediately left the road,
and plunged into the thick woods, in the direction whence the mournful
sound proceeded. About a quarter of a mile from the road, I came to
a small opening in the forest, where was a cabin, and in front of
the cabin was a fire, and at the side of the fire was a young woman
ironing clothes, and singing a mournful air as loud as she could
scream. This was the noise I took to be cries of distress. I learned
from her, that the fellow I had just seen was her husband, and that
they had been married about two weeks, after three weeks acquaintance.
I told her about meeting him in the road, and that I believed he was
not there for a good purpose, and, moreover, that I was fearful she
had married a scamp. Learning from her that it was ten miles to the
nearest house, I bid her good-by, for I did not care about stopping
long in that locality. While leading my horse back to the road, for
the underbrush was so thick I could not ride, I heard several times a
slight noise in the woods near me, but paid no particular attention to
it. After much difficulty, and many scratches, I regained the road. But
had proceeded but a short distance when I became satisfied that the man
I had just seen was following me, for I could distinctly hear footsteps
in the woods a few rods at the left. The night being very dark I could
not see him, could hardly see my horse; and the mud being deep, and the
horse tired, I could travel only at a slow gait. I stopped my horse,
and peered into the dark, but nothing could be seen. The rascal came
to a halt when I stopped. I dismounted on the right side of the horse,
having him between me and the villain. Stood there, perhaps, fifteen
minutes, without either party making the least noise, expected every
moment to hear the crack of his gun. He finally made tracks _from_
me as fast as he could run, and I remounted my horse and proceeded
on my journey. He doubtless intended to rob me, steal my horse, and
perhaps do worse; but presuming I was armed--but I was not--and seeing
I was pretty resolute, he did not dare attack me without being sure
of decided advantage. Being on that road again soon after, I learned
that he had fled to parts unknown, leaving his wife, to escape being
arrested for some crime.

The next day I reached Anderson, and delivered five discourses before I
left. At the close of one of the sermons, a Methodist minister replied.
He dwelt long on the words of the apostle Paul, “As it is appointed
unto men once to die and after that the judgment.” Heb. ix. 28. I
answered:

If the gentleman is correct in his understanding of this passage,
it demolishes one tenet of Orthodoxy. The passage asserts, that “it
is _appointed_ unto men once to die.” Now, the creeds tell us, that
temporal death is _not_ of divine appointment, but rather contrary
to the divine will. Man, say the creeds, was created _immortal_, and
it was the will of God that he should not die; it was the divine
appointment, that he should live forever. But in an evil hour, Adam,
the first man, sinned, and brought temporal death on himself and on
all his posterity, contrary to the divine appointment. If partialism
is right here, this passage does not refer to temporal death; and if
it does refer to temporal death, it is wrong in denying that temporal
death is of divine appointment.

To what “men” does the text refer? for it does not say _all_ men
are appointed to die. Read the second verse following: “For the law
having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of
the things, can never with those sacrifices which THEY offered year
by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect.” The pronoun
“they” in this verse, as any one can see, refers to the “men” spoken
of in the text. The apostle says, “they,” that is, the “men,” “offered
sacrifices.” Now, all men do not offer sacrifices, neither are they
required to. But under the Jewish law, a certain class of men were
appointed to offer sacrifices for the sins of the people. They were
the _priests_, and it is to them, and to them only, the text refers.
According to the grammatical structure of the text and context, the
“men” were a class whose business it was to offer sacrifices. It is
certain, then, that the apostle does not speak of all men, but of a
certain class of his countrymen. And this is confirmed by the fact,
that in the Greek, the article _tois_ is before the word men, and that
article means _the_ or _these_. Retaining the article, the passage
reads, “And as it is appointed unto _these_ men once to die.” What men?
Why, the men appointed by the Jewish law to offer sacrifices.

But did these men “die” in their sacrifices? Yes, in the sense here
intended. For the meaning of the apostle we must heed the connection in
which the passage occurs. In the 16th and 17th verses, speaking of the
first testament of the Jewish covenant, the apostle says, “For where a
testament is, there must of necessity be the _death_ of the testator,
for a testament is of force when men are _dead_; otherwise it is of no
strength at all while the testator liveth.” It is so now--no _will_, or
_testament_, is in force till the testator is _dead_. Well, Moses was
the testator of the Jewish covenant, and we know that was in full force
_before_ Moses _died temporally_. What kind of a death, then, does the
apostle mean? Read on: “For when Moses had spoken every precept to
all the people”--that is, given them the whole covenant--“according
to the law, he took the blood of calves and goats, with water and
scarlet wool, and myrrh, and sprinkled both the book”--that contained
the covenant--“and all the people saying, This is the _blood of
the testament_ which God hath enjoined unto you.” This sacrifice
which Moses then offered in the presence of the people, is what the
apostle calls the _death of the testator_. He did not, of course, die
temporally, but he shed blood, offered sacrifice, and thereby sealed
the covenant, and that he terms the death of the testator. Well, we
know that the Jewish priests were set apart, “appointed” to “die” for
the people in the same sense Moses died to seal the covenant. The
language with reference to Moses dying in his sacrifice, explains what
is meant by the words, “it is appointed unto men once to die”--they
died as Moses died.

There is reference here to the Annual Atonement of the Jews. On that
great occasion, the priest, who was the most conspicuous personage,
appeared before the assembled congregation--that appearing was typical
of Christ’s first coming. The priest then offered sacrifice for the
sins of the Jewish nation--that was typical of the death of Christ for
the world. The priest then disappeared, and entered into the “Holiest
of all”--that was typical of Christ entering into paradise. In due
time the priest reappeared to the people--that was typical of Christ’s
resurrection--his “_second_ appearing.” The priest at his second
appearing before the people, passed _judgment_ on them, which was, that
their sins were forgiven--and that was typical of the judgment passed
on all who trust in the risen Savior. They behold him the second time,
the risen, the glorified Savior, without sin unto salvation. His first
appearing, was when he came in the flesh; his second appearing, when he
showed himself to the world in his spiritual and glorified condition,
and all who confide in the risen Redeemer, as the way, the truth, and
the life, are blessed with life and salvation. To them he “appears the
second time without sin unto salvation.”

I also delivered several discourses in Franklin. A Millerite, at the
close of one of them, attempted to show that the New Testament teaches,
that this earth will be destroyed. His chief reliance was on Matt.
xiii. “That passage,” said he, “speaks of the end of the world, the
harvest, and the furnace of fire. It is not figurative language. This
world is to be burned up, and then the wicked will be cast into a lake
of fire. I do not know when all this will take place. It may occur
to-day, to-morrow, this year, next year; I know not the hour, day or
year, but I do know that dreadful day of destruction will surely come,
sooner, or later.”

I replied: The passage in Matt. xiii. affords the gentleman’s
destructive theory no aid whatever. Learned men of all denominations
tell us, that the “end of the world,” in that passage, is the end
of the Jewish world, or age; that Christ had no reference to the
destruction of this material earth. Bishop Pearce renders the original,
“End of the age, viz: that of the Jewish dispensation.” Dr. Hammond
translates it thus: “Conclusion of the age.” Dr. Cappe says, the words
mean, “The accomplishment of the age, which in scripture language,
uniformly relates to the Mosaic economy.” This interpretation is fully
sustained by the New Testament. Speaking of Jesus, the apostle Paul
says: “For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of
the world: but now once in the _end of the world_ hath he appeared to
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.” Heb. ix. 26. At the end of
what world was Christ sacrificed? Not the end of this earth surely, for
it has survived his death most two thousand years. According to the
gentleman’s logic, this earth was all burned up eighteen hundred years
ago, and it is all delusion that it now exists, turns on its axis, and
revolves around yonder sun. In another place the apostle represents
the end of the world as having taken place in his day: “And they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world _are
come_.” 1 Cor. x. 11. If the apostle Paul was right, my friend here is
miserably deluded. The Mosaic world, or era, did end in the apostolic
age, and it is to that the New Testament always refers when it speaks
of the end of the world.

“The harvest,” says Jesus, “is the end of the world.” In the Bible,
the end of an era, a city, or nation, is called its harvest. Of the
destruction of the city of Babylon, it is said, “For thus saith the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, The daughter of Babylon is like a
threshing floor, it is time to thresh her; yet a little while, and the
time of her _harvest_ shall come.... And Babylon shall become heaps,
a dwelling place for dragons; an astonishment, and a hissing, without
an inhabitant.” Jer. li. 33, 37. The end of that city is called its
harvest; so the end of the Jewish dispensation is called its harvest.

The ending of the Jewish age and nation, was to involve the ruin of
multitudes of that people. Jesus often warned them of that coming
calamity; told them, that unless they reformed they would all perish
in the approaching storm. That national desolation is called “wrath to
come,” “damnation,” “everlasting punishment,” “furnace of fire.” “Whose
fire is in Zion, and his _furnace in Jerusalem_.” Isa. xxxi. 9. “Son
of man, the house of Israel is to me become dross: all they are brass,
and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are even
the dross of silver. Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Because ye are
all become dross, behold, therefore I will gather you into the midst of
Jerusalem. As they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and
tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt
it; so will I gather you in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave
you there, and melt you. Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in
the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof. As
silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in
the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the Lord have poured out
my fury upon you.” Ezek. xxii. 18-22. These passages illustrate the
meaning of “furnace of fire;” they tell us where it is--_in Jerusalem_,
not in eternity, as the gentleman imagines. In the text the wicked Jews
are called “tares;” in the above quotations they are termed “dross,”
“dross of silver,” “lead,” “iron,” “tin.” At the end of the Jewish
state, the righteous,--the gold and wheat of the nation,--were saved,
but the “tares,” the “dross” were destroyed by famine, pestilence,
and the sword. This passage, then, certainly has no reference to the
destruction of this earth, nor to any calamity to man beyond the grave.

Although I find no evidence in the New Testament of the destruction
of this earth, I conclude from analogy, that it is destined to be
destroyed. Everything that lives on the earth has its birth, maturity,
and death. This is true of every plant, animal and man. And is it
not so of the earth? The matter that composes it may be eternal,
but there was doubtless a time in the distant past when this globe
had no existence. It is supposed that the sun once occupied all the
space in which the solar planets are now revolving, and that those
planets, with their satellites, were then parts of the sun; but by
the operation of the laws of the Creator, governing that immense mass
of matter, portions of it became detached from time to time, and
commenced their revolution on their axis, and around the mother globe.
Those detached portions are now the planets which belong to the solar
system. If this hypothesis be correct, the earth had a beginning. It
has passed through wonderful changes since the day of its birth;--it
has condensed, cooled, and become fit for the growth of vegetation, and
for the habitation of animals and man. And will it not in time lose its
vitality like a decrepit old man, and finally die, and return to the
sun whence it came? Is not this to be the fate of all the planets? And
will not the sun himself lose his life, luster and glory, and fall into
the vortex whence he came? And will not this decomposed matter again be
vitalized, and form other globes? And is not birth, growth, death, and
decomposition going on, not only among plants, animals, and men, but in
all departments of the material universe? And has not this process been
everlastingly going on? and will it not continue to go on forever and
ever?

Lectured in Columbus several times; and in going there got rather a
cold bath. Came to a stream, and being informed by a man living on
its bank, that the water was shallow, plunged into it without any
hesitation, but soon found that it was past fording and very rapid.
When I reached the opposite shore was wet through, and the weather
being very cold, my clothes were soon frozen from head to foot. Rode
several miles in that condition, and when I reached Columbus, which
was in the night, was about as cold as a living man can be. A preacher
replied to me in a very bitter spirit, and I took occasion to exhibit
some of the contradictions of his brethren, thus:

It is believed, that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world, but
that nine tenths of the world will be forever lost. It is believed,
that Jesus tasted death for every man, but that millions will receive
no benefit from it. It is believed, that Jesus will reign till he
has subdued all things to God, but that a majority of mankind will
be eternally unsubdued. It is believed, that all war is unchristian,
but that God will keep up a war in hell forever. It is believed,
that capital punishment is wrong, but that God will inflict capital
punishment on all who leave this world unregenerated. It is believed
that we ought to overcome evil with good, but that God will overcome
it by inflicting an infinite evil. It is believed, that it is the duty
of man to labor in season and out of season to regenerate his fellow
man, but that God will defeat his labors by placing multitudes where
salvation never can be attained. It is believed, that all mankind
are brethren, but that a devil will sever that brotherhood, and drag
most of our race into the infernal regions. It is believed, that we
should love our fellow men, but that God hates nearly all of them
with infinite hatred. It is believed, that we should imitate God, but
if we did so, provided the creeds are true, we should be incarnate
fiends. It is believed, that there is only one God, but that there
are three Gods. It is believed, that man is by nature religious, but
that he is by nature totally depraved. These, and many others, are the
contradictions of what is called Orthodoxy. Can that religion be of
heaven which so abounds with absurdities and contradictions?

I subsequently had a discussion in this place with J. Wright, a
Campbellite minister. Salvation, said I, in one of my speeches,
is the theme of the Bible--of Moses, the prophet, Jesus and the
apostles. But what is salvation from? Mr. Wright says, it is from a
future endless hell, from the wrath of God, and the power of satan.
He described in burning words the horrors of that infernal pit he
wants to save us from. He described it _beautifully_, and I noticed
that some of his brethren seemed to be delighted with the charming
picture he presented. They, doubtless, are sure of a comfortable seat
in the heavenly mansion, having had their sins washed away in yonder
stream, and expect to have the supreme satisfaction of seeing us,
sinners, writhing in the flames of hell, the victims of devils, and
the cursed of God. They laugh now in anticipation of this great joy
to come. I envy them not their spirit nor their hopes. But what is
salvation really from? According to the Bible, it is deliverance from
sin, error, condemnation, moral death. “For the grace of God that
bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and
godly, in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior, Jesus Christ; who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. These
things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man
despise thee.” Titus ii. 11-15. This is a clear statement of salvation.
It is deliverance from “all iniquity”--soul-purification--and is
effected by the grace or truth of God, teaching us to “deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and live soberly, righteously and godly” amid the
evils of this world. “These things speak and exhort,” adds the apostle.
Let this be remembered by those who assert that a _present_ salvation
is nothing, is not worth striving for, if there are not eternal fires
beyond the grave to escape. “Let no man despise you.” Remember this,
ye who despise the message of him, who urges a present salvation, but
knows nothing of salvation from the wrath of God, nor the torments of
perdition.

The first time salvation is referred to in the Bible, it relates to
deliverance from iniquity. “I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and
thou shalt bruise his heel.” Gen. iii. 15. Here we have the cheering
assurance, that sin, symbolized by the serpent, shall be crushed,
ruined, destroyed, and Adam’s race, consequently, delivered from its
blasting, deadly embrace--but not a word about salvation from the
future hell Mr. W. talks so eloquently about. In Mal. iii. 2, 3, the
mission of Jesus is clearly stated: “But who may abide the day of
his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a
refiner’s fire, and like fuller’s soap: and he shall sit as a refiner
and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and
purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering in righteousness.” Jesus is the refiner; truth is the fire;
man, created in the image of God, is the gold; the dross is man’s
falsities. As the refiner with his fire separates the gold from the
dross, saves the one and destroys the other, so Jesus, by the word of
truth, the gospel of our salvation, purifies our souls, separates the
earthy from the heavenly, saves the one and destroys the other. Not a
word here about deliverance from the flames of hell, or the wrath of
God. The earthly father of this soul-refiner was instructed to call
his name Jesus, because he would “save his people from _their sins_;”
and during his ministry on earth, Jesus labored to that end. “Reform!”
cried he, “for the kingdom of heaven is at hand,”--not the kingdom of
hell, mark you. We should reform, live pure and right, from _heavenly_
considerations--not from motives of an infernal nature. Nineteen
twentieths of the sermons of this age would not be uttered if all the
preachers understood that text.

At last, the great Reformer died, and the apostle tells us why he died.
“He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but him who died for them and rose again.” 2 Cor. v. 15.
Jesus lived, labored, died, and rose again, that we might “live unto
him.” But we are told by the popular creed, that it was the end and aim
of Jesus, whether living or dying, to placate the wrath of God, and
save us from a burning hell. After the Master’s death, the apostles
continued his work, and it is well known that they labored faithfully
for the present salvation of their fellow men. The chief of them said,
“Jesus, whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man, in
all wisdom that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.”
Col. i. 28. He preached to make men perfect in gospel virtues--not to
redeem them from a fabled world of woe. The apostle’s words to his
pupil, Timothy, are very comprehensive: “All scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.” 2 Tim. ii. 16,
17. The object of all heavenly influences is summed up in these brief
words. To perfect our character, and cause us to abound in good works,
is the ultimate of revelation. And how much more rational is this than
the popular notion, that it is a device to satisfy justice, appease
heaven’s wrath, and rescue us from hell’s flames.

The discussion was to have continued four days, but Mr. Wright’s
friends closed it on the evening of the second day. He remarked to an
acquaintance of mine soon after this, that he had rather debate with a
ten-acre field full of sectarians, than with one Universalist.

From Columbus I journeyed to Nashville, and delivered three discourses.
“It is too good to be true,” said a preacher, at the close of one of
the sermons. I remarked, That is the strongest objection I know of
to this soul-cheering faith. That ourselves, relatives, friends, all
mankind, are the children of God; that he loves us with a love many
floods cannot quench; that we have all commenced a life that is never
to end, and are destined to grow wiser, and better, and happier,
forever and ever; that we shall again meet the loved and lost of
earth, and with hand in hand, and soul linked to soul, forever tread
the courts of the New Jerusalem--that all this is our glorious future,
I admit is hard to believe. That we are born to so rich and glorious
an inheritance is hard to believe. There are many other blessings our
heavenly Father has provided for us, we might think the same of under
certain circumstances. Had it been our sad lot to have been confined to
this date in a dungeon, never to have known father, mother, brother,
sister, never to have seen the face of a friend, or to have heard the
voice of love, never to have seen the green earth, the bright sun, or
blue sky, and told to-day for the first time, that the beautiful earth
and star-spangled sky exist as we now behold them, full of beauty for
the eye, music for the ear, and love for the heart, and that in a short
time we should exchange our dark, damp, cold cell for this glorious
world, where we should meet father, mother, brother and sister, would
we not be apt to exclaim, “It is too good to be true!”

A man who has been an Atheist all his life, never heard of a God, or
of a future life, when told for the first time that there is a God
who governs the world, and guides the destinies of men, and that he
is immortal and will live forever, I say when these facts are first
revealed to him, he would likely say, “It is too good to be true.” A
family that has ever been doomed to want, sickness, disappointment,
and sorrow in every form, when informed that a kind friend has deeded
them a comfortable home, and provided for their future support and
happiness, and that within a few days they will come in possession
of all these blessings, when informed of this they would probably
unbelievingly exclaim, “It is too good to be true.”

I am not at all surprised to hear people, who all their life-time have
lived in the shade and gloom and sorrow of a dark, repulsive, and cruel
theology, say, “Universalism is too good to be true.” There is such a
vast difference between that partial, gloomy creed, and “the grace of
God which bringeth salvation to all men,” I do not wonder they think
the latter too good to be true. It is certainly true, that we do not
merit, by any act of ours, such blessings, and are lost in wonder when
we reflect on the immense provisions our heavenly Father has provided
for us, and nothing short of the best of evidence makes us rest in
our glorious hope. But our hope is based on a sure foundation--on the
character, purpose, and promises of God. On this divine trinity we
found our faith, and rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

But the doctrine of endless misery is too bad to be true. The theory,
that consigns countless millions of mankind to the wrath of God, and
the flames of hell, is altogether too bad to be true. Before I can
subscribe to such a monstrous creed, I must believe God to be the worst
being in the universe--has no love, mercy, justice, goodness, but is
the very essence of cruelty and malignity; I must believe all this
ere I can, for a moment, harbor the thought that he can be the author
of ceaseless suffering. But while I have reason to rejoice in his
goodness, I will cling to the faith the gentleman thinks is “too good
to be true.”




CHAPTER XII.


  DISCUSSION IN FRANKLIN--JUSTICE OF GOD--WHAT THE GOSPEL IS?--SOCIETY
  ORGANIZED--DISCOURSE ON TOTAL DEPRAVITY--CONVERSATION WITH A
  PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER ON CHRISTIAN REWARDS--TALK WITH A CATHOLIC--A
  METHODIST--A PRESBYTERIAN--A CAMPBELLITE--SALVATION--A MORMON
  SERMON--REPLY TO IT--A JOURNEY TO LOUISVILLE AND CINCINNATI.

While I resided in Terre Haute, I had a debate in Franklin, Ind., with
A. L. Edmonds, on the final destiny of man. The discussion continued
four days. Mr. Edmonds dwelt long and emphatically on the _Justice_ of
God--claimed that it required the endless wretchedness of offenders. I
replied as follows, and he dropped that subject:

It is said that _Justice_ requires the endless suffering of some men.
That, although the goodness, mercy, and benevolence of the Deity may be
in favor of the ultimate happiness of all men, yet his justice requires
that the wicked, who die in their sins, should be doomed to suffer
unending torment. The system of faith into which is incorporated, as
one of its parts, the doctrine of endless punishment, suspends the
final state of men upon the _condition_ they are in when they leave
this world. The question is not how they have _lived_, but how they
have _died_. This is the point--the pivot--upon which is made to turn
the immortal destinies of men. No matter how sinful a man may live all
his life--“though as wicked as Cain, and corrupt as Mary Magdalene with
her seven devils,” if he only _repent_, believe in the Lord Jesus--join
the church--or, in fine, “get religion” just before he dies, all will
be well with him--his reward will be heaven. While on the other hand,
no matter how moral, upright and godly a man may live, though he may
have known and _obeyed_ the Scriptures from his youth up to a good old
age, discharged all his duties as a humble and faithful Christian,
and been the means of blessing hundreds of his fellow beings, both
temporally and spiritually; yet, “if he fall from grace,” and become a
sinner, even but one day before his death, and die in that state, he,
poor old man, must go to hell!

This is a briefly drawn picture of the system advocated by that class
of men which _seem_ to be such sticklers for justice. If any should say
such a system is opposed to reason, the Bible, and every principle of
justice and rectitude, all I have to say is, I can’t help it. But it is
nevertheless a true and faithful representation, so far as it goes, of
the orthodox plan of salvation and _damnation_--“nothing extenuated,
nor aught set down in malice.” Nor all its advocates can do, will ever
be sufficient, to make the system appear anything different from this
representation. Indeed, I do not think they will _try_ to do it,--they
_believe_ and _understand_ it, as I have described it. Let it stand so
then, as good and wholesome Orthodoxy, while I instance a few cases
for illustration, that we may be the better enabled to see some of the
monstrosities and legitimate conclusions which must forever follow from
the above admitted premises.

1. Charles and Henry were brothers--twin brothers; they lived together
until they had attained their twentieth year, when Charles died; and
as he had made no profession of religion, he was sentenced to endless
pains. Had Henry died at the same time, he would have shared a similar
doom, for he was as destitute of religion as his brother; luckily for
him, however, he lived until his seventieth year, during the whole of
which time he was in an unconverted state, except the last six months;
for the last six months he had lived a pious life, and consequently was
admitted, after his death, to heaven.

“The punishment of sin,” saith my friend, “does not take place here,
but is deferred until the sinner reaches the spiritual world.”
Consequently, Henry received no punishment in this world, for his long
career of sinfulness; and it will not be pretended that he received it
after he arrived in heaven--he was therefore not punished at all. But
how fares it with his brother Charles? He, poor fellow, must welter
in quenchless flames, for the crimes of his brief existence. Has God
rendered to these twins according to justice?

2. Two young men attempt the murder of a man for money, and while
engaged in the foul deed, one of them is killed accidentally, by
his comrade, from the discharge of a pistol, and, of course, goes
immediately to hell--_to an endless hell_? The other succeeds in
assassinating his victim--takes his money, which is sufficient to
purchase a vessel; one is procured, and after obtaining a crew to his
mind, he launches forth upon the “great deep,” an abandoned pirate.
Hark! do you hear those cries which float upon the night air of the
South Sea? They come from a ship in distress. Hark again! those were
the cries of women; the young mother, and the “gay guiltless” maiden
are there. The youth and the man of gray hairs--but the sounds of
lamentation have ceased--all is over with them. The pirate ship has
been there, and the unfortunate have all been doomed; for alas, they
had no religion. Forty years pass, and the pirate is arraigned before
a tribunal of justice--is condemned--and confesses that, besides
the innumerable abominations he has committed in his long life of
wickedness, he has been accessory to the murder of four hundred
persons! What must be done with him? hell is too good for him! Yes,
hell is too good for him, and, of course, he must go to heaven. A few
days are given him--he repents--and swings from the gallows off to
glory. There, from his exalted station of bliss, he looks down into
the abodes of the damned, and sees scores of immortal, wretched beings,
sent there by his own hands. Among his unfortunate victims, he sees the
innocent girl of sixteen, and the gray-headed father--and there, too,
is his first companion of crime, who fell ere he completed his first
deed of wickedness. Is this justice? the justice of an infinitely just
God? Oh mockery!

3. Two men--A and B--avowed enemies, meet in the street. Each is armed
with a rifle, and each makes ready to dispatch his enemy. A presents
his gun--it snaps; the cap was out of order. In an instant B takes a
deadly aim, his rifle discharges, and A is a dead man. B is arrested,
condemned and dies; but, as in all such cases, he repented in time to
secure heaven, as a reward! Now if A’s gun had not missed fire, he
would have killed B, and, of course, sent him to hell, while he might
have repented and gone to heaven. But he, poor fellow, must go to hell,
merely for the want of a good cap!

The most abandoned wretch that ever disgraced humanity, can, according
to this bankrupt system, obtain an easy passport to heaven, by a
few minutes repentance just before he dies, while the moral, good,
virtuous, humane, yea, the faithful Christian--the laborer in the
cause of his Master--though he hath worn out a long life in warning
his fellows, and inducing them to reform; though he has, according to
Orthodoxy, been the means of converting hundreds to the belief and
practice of the Christian religion, yet, if in an evil hour, he be
drawn from the path of rectitude--become a sinner, and die suddenly,
without time to repent, he goes to an endless hell! Oh, what justice!
what consistency! Orthodoxy, thou art _not_ a jewel!

Orthodoxy may sing her siren song the world over, it will not alter
facts; men are punished here for their sins; and the worst of it all
is, that these poor wretches, who have been deceived by the song, and
thereby led into sin, still receive their punishment before they die,
and often without knowing that it is the reward of their own doings!
They will charge their suffering to a cruel fate, hard fortune, or some
other cause, not knowing that the hand of a just God is upon them! But
whether men believe it or not, if they do wrong, they must and will
receive their reward; and if their experience fails to undeceive them,
it may serve to convince those who live after them, that there “is a
God who judgeth in the earth,” and that “he cannot do iniquity.”

I closed my last speech on the last proposition as follows: I am now
nearly through with my part in this debate. I have presented the gospel
to you the past four days as I truly believe it. The word _gospel_
signifies _good news_; and it is good news from God to man, from heaven
to earth. It tells us,

1. That God is the Father of mankind. “Have we not _all_ one Father?”
Addressing Pagans in Athens, the Gentile apostle said, “We are the
offspring of God.” Jesus instructs us to pray, “Our Father, who art in
heaven.” And he also teaches that our heavenly Father’s love for us
far exceeds the earthly parent’s love for his offspring. And the God
who inspired him and his apostles to utter such noble sentiments, hath
said, “The mother may forget her child but I will not forget you.” Is
not this good news to the sons and daughters of earth? We are passing
away from our earthly friends, and they are daily leaving us; and is it
not a blessed assurance that we have an ever living and ever present
Friend, who will never leave nor forsake us? Is not this hope good to
_live_ by--good to _die_ by?

2. This same gospel also proclaims the good news of eternal life and a
blissful immortality for mankind. We are the children of God, created
in his image, partake of his immortal nature; and, commencing our
existence in the bud of being, in the cradle of all life, are destined
to manifest more and more the divinity of our nature, as the eternal
ages bear us onward and upward.

3. And from these cardinal truths, the New Testament draws the logical
inference, that we should love the Lord our God with all our heart,
soul and strength, and our fellow men as ourself. God is the Father
of all, and his love extends to all, and hence we should be loving
and dutiful children. We all belong to one family, are members of one
household, and hence we should be kind, forbearing, and forgiving to
each other. This is the gospel in letter and spirit, in theory and
practice; and nothing but this is the gospel. It is all embraced in the
word _love_--a little word, but the length, breadth, and depth of the
universe are required to express its meaning. God is love, his purpose
is love, and love will bless his children while immortality endures.

But there is not a drop of love, nor a note of glad tidings in my
opponent’s creed. It proclaims it to be the purpose of the Almighty to
consign millions of mankind to regions of eternal sorrow, darkness and
death; and those who may escape that dreadful doom, unless they have
hearts of demons, will forever deplore the sad fate of their earthly
associates--those they were required to love as themselves. The words
love, goodness, mercy, justice, gospel, good news, glad tidings, should
be all stricken from the Bible, if Mr. Edmonds’ creed is true, and
words that savor of fire and brimstone, should take their places. Yea,
the sun, moon and stars, the refreshing shower, the genial breeze,
and productive earth, should all tell us of fire and fury, instead of
love, goodness and justice, if eternal woe is to be the doom of half
of mankind. If this terrible dogma is true, it seems to me, that on
the blazing disc of the sun should be written in characters as black
as midnight--_endless woe_; on the pale face of the moon, and on every
twinkling star--_endless woe_, that all might read their doom from
night to morn, from morn to night; and that every breeze that blows,
should scream in our ears so loud that the dead might hear--_endless
woe_. But thank heaven, God is love, the gospel is good news, and these
malignant creeds are false.

A large number of clergymen of different orders attended the
discussion, and they held evening meetings during the progress of the
debate, but all parties were silent on the subjects that were discussed
during the day. The disputants were kind and courteous towards each
other, and their christian spirit pervaded the hearers of all creeds.
A society was organized in Franklin the day after the debate closed,
it being Sunday, and I preached in the place monthly for one year. But
the distance was too far for me to continue the visits, and as no one
could be obtained to take my place, meetings were suspended. The good
cause has suffered all over the West for want of competent ministers
to supply the wants of the people. If a dozen faithful pastors had
been located in Indiana in those days, liberal societies would now
have been well organized and permanently established all over the
state. In Franklin, Columbus, Martinsville, Gosport, Bloomington,
Greencastle, Ladoga, Crawfordsville, Perrysville, Covington, Lafayette,
Fort Wayne, Richmond, Madison, and in many other places where we have
no organizations, flourishing and influential societies would now be
established. But ministers could not be obtained, and hence much of the
labor of the missionary was of but little avail. Having a paper on my
hands, I was obliged to travel far and near to sustain it, and could
not devote much time at any one place.

A few days after this discussion, I delivered several sermons in
Edinburg; and one of them was preached in the Methodist meeting-house,
and the subject, at the request of the pastor, was “Total Depravity.”
The following is the gist of the discourse:

I will first show by the advocates of total depravity, what they mean
by it. The “Presbyterian Confession of Faith” thus defines it: “The
sinfulness of estate whereinto man fell, consisteth in the guilt
of Adam’s first sin, the want of that righteousness wherein he was
created, and the corruption of his nature, whereby he is utterly
indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all that is spiritually
good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and that continually.”

The “Shorter Catechism” says: “The sinfulness of that estate whereinto
man fell, consists in the _guilt of Adam’s first sin_, the want of
original righteousness, and the corruption of his whole nature.”

The “Baptist Philadelphia Confession” tells us that “Our first parents,
by this sin, fell from their original righteousness and communion with
God, and we in them, whereby death came upon all, all becoming dead in
sin, and _wholly_ defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and
body.”

The “Methodist Discipline” says: “Original sin standeth not in the
following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do vainly talk) but it is the
corruption of the nature of every man, that is naturally engendered
of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from original
righteousness, and of his _own nature inclined to evil_, and that
continually.”

John Calvin, in his explanation of this doctrine, says: “Original
sin seems to be the inheritable perverseness and corruption of our
nature, poured abroad in _all parts of the soul_, which first makes us
deserving of God’s wrath, and then also bringeth forth those works in
us, called in Scripture, the works of the flesh. These two things are
distinctly to be noted, that is, that, being thus in all parts of our
nature perverted and corrupted, we are now, even for such corruption,
only holden worthy of damnation,” etc.

W. W. Perkins: “In reprobate infants, the execution of God’s decree is
this: as soon as they are born, for the guilt of original and actual
sin, being left in God’s secret judgment unto themselves, they dying
are rejected of God forever.”

Twiss: “Every man that is damned, is damned for original as well as
actual sins, and many thousand infants, _only for original_.”

Arthur Hildersham: “There is in them (infants) a natural proneness,
disposition and inclination to every thing that is evil; as there is in
the youngest lion, or of a bear, or of a wolf, unto cruelty, or in the
egg of a cockatrice, before it is hatched. You have heard it evidently
proved, 1. That all infants are sinners and deserve damnation. 2. That
many infants have been vessels of wrath and fire-brands of hell.”

Here we have a full, clear, perfect definition of total depravity, as
held by Presbyterians, Baptists and Methodists. It is here taught that
all mankind are by _nature_, “utterly indisposed, disabled, and made
opposite to all that is good, and wholly inclined to all evil.” Every
human being, according to this theory, that God ever made, is “wholly
inclined to _all evil_”--to lying, cheating, stealing, murdering, etc.,
etc., etc. All men, then, by nature are liars, thieves, and murderers.
This is the character of every infant when it is born into this world.
Mark the words, “There is in infants a natural proneness, disposition
and inclination to _every thing that is evil_; as there is in the
youngest lion, or of the bear, or of the wolf, unto cruelty, or in the
egg of the cockatrice before it be hatched,” and hence the writer adds,
“1. All infants are _sinners_, and deserve damnation. 2. That many
infants have been vessels of wrath and fire-brands of hell.”

If these are correct views of human nature, for six thousand years God
has been creating totally depraved beings--thieves, liars, assassins,
murderers. God is the source whence all crime flows, for he creates
all mankind _villains_; gives them all an “inclination to all evil.”
And this is not the worst of it--all deserve everlasting damnation,
because God created them inclined to villainy of every name and grade.
The definition of depravity given above, means all this, says all
this, and to be a true Presbyterian, Baptist, or Methodist, one must
believe all this. But we ask, who really believes a word of it? Who
believes that God is the monster these creeds represent? Who believes
that he has cursed us all with an infernal nature, and will then damn
millions forever and ever, for being cursed with such a nature? Where
is the mother who really believes that her infant is totally depraved,
wholly “inclined to all evil,” “a fire-brand of hell,” and “deserves
damnation?” People may subscribe to such horrid notions, preach them,
and try to defend them, but who really, heart and soul, believes them?

If mankind believed that their fellow men were totally depraved, it
would destroy all confidence between man and man. Who would trust a
fellow that he believed was by nature “wholly inclined to all evil?”
Who would employ such a physician, lawyer or clerk? Who would trust
such a banker, or commission merchant? Who would ride on a railroad,
or sail in a vessel, that he believed was run by such wretches? If men
really believed in total depravity, they would tremble with fear by day
and by night. They would shun each other as they shun a deadly serpent.
And if that dogma is true, there would be no virtue, truth, purity in
the world, but crime of every name and grade would reign supreme. God
would not be known, and a devil would be universally worshiped.

And then what wonderful transformations, according to the creeds,
have sin and grace wrought in human nature. God created man perfect
in holiness and righteousness. Human nature was then all divine; not
a spot nor a blemish in it. Every faculty of the mind was in perfect
harmony with every other faculty. Angelic harmony reigned in the
soul. But the devil in the shape of an ugly serpent, in one moment,
ruined the best, the most perfect of God’s works, and for the creation
of which he had exercised his greatest skill. And how easy it was
effected. One temptation was presented and the work was done. Why, even
some of those who are said to be totally depraved, and fire-brands of
hell, often resist temptation. But mother Eve, holy and divine as she
was, succumbed at the first attack, and soon caused her heroic husband
to do likewise. This one sin transformed Adam and Eve into devils, and
caused all their progeny down through a thousand generations to be
born devils, “vessels of wrath,” “fire-brands of hell,” and “wholly
inclined to all evil.” Their nature became entirely changed--changed
from angelic purity to total depravity. According to this theory, sin
is far more potent than grace. One sin committed by one person, ruined
countless millions--unborn countless millions of mankind; but the grace
of God in one soul sanctifies only that one soul, and perhaps not that
one permanently; he may fall from grace. One sin ruined the world, but
all the power, wisdom, and grace of heaven will fail to redeem it.

And then by doing so and so, it is said another change is wrought in
our nature--we are restored to the divine likeness, to the purity and
holiness Adam enjoyed before his fall. This theory of the change of
man’s nature from purity to depravity, and from depravity to purity,
is all a fiction. If the nature of man can change from the divine to
the infernal, why not change from a man to a _horse_? The truth is, the
nature of nothing changes from God down to the worm. Every mineral,
plant and animal has received a definite nature, and never changes one
iota. So with men, their _nature_ is unchangeable--soul and body then
are the same yesterday, to-day and forever. The body may be diseased
to-day, but by proper means it may be restored to health, but its
nature is not changed. So the mind, the soul, may be disordered, and by
moral means may be restored to a healthy condition, but its _nature_ is
not changed. I am aware that several passages of Scripture are adduced
to sustain this terrible theology of innate total depravity, and I will
briefly show that they refer to nothing of the kind.

1. “Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me.” Psalm. li. 5. There is nothing here about total depravity, or
about our nature being “wholly inclined to all evil.” All inherit
tendencies to evil and to good, for mankind are imperfect. We inherit
these tendencies, not from Adam, but from our immediate parents. Such
biases are _constitutional_, not down deep in man’s _nature_. Besides,
we are not to understand these words strictly literal. David uttered
them in a season of great debasement. They are hyperbolical like the
following: “I am poured out like water; and all my bones are out of
joint; my heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.”
“And my bones are consumed.” “All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like
unto thee.” “I am a worm and not man.” All this is to be understood
figuratively.

2. “Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean thing? Not one.” Job
xiv. 4. Of course, the _moral character_ of many is unclean, but what
does that prove about their _nature_? It does not intimate that any one
is _born_ unclean.

3. “And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth,
and that every imagination of the thought of his heart was only evil
continually.” Gen. vi. 5. This simply means that the antediluvians
were a very wicked people; not that they were born totally depraved,
for in the 12th verse it is said, that “all flesh _had corrupted his
way_,” which it could not have done if the Creator had made “all flesh”
totally corrupt at its birth. They were corrupt by practice, not by
nature.

4. “The heart of man is deceitful above all things and desperately
wicked; who can know it?” Jer. xvii. 9. The prophet is speaking of the
sin of Judah. In the first verse he says, “The sin of Judah is written
with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond; it is graven upon
the table of their hearts, and upon the horns of your altars.” It was
not the sin of Adam entailed upon them, it was their own sin, the sin
of Judah. They had corrupted their hearts, had departed from virtue’s
ways, and had become “desperately wicked.” We see nothing here about
being created totally depraved.

5. “They are all gone out of the way, they are together become
unprofitable; there are none that doeth good, no, not one.” Rom. ii.
12. This passage clearly proves that men, in the days of St. Paul,
had corrupted themselves, not that they were born totally corrupt.
They had “_gone_ out of the way,” not _born_ “out of the way.” They
had “_become_ unprofitable,” not _born_ “unprofitable.” “Their throat
is an open sepulcher, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness,
their feet is swift to shed blood.” Verses 12, 14, 15. Is this true
of _infants_? We know it is not. He is not speaking then of man’s
condition by _nature_ but by _practice_. In the preceding chapter the
apostle says, “For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by
_nature_ the things contained in the law, these, having not the law,
are a law unto themselves, which shows the works of the law written _in
their hearts_.” Wicked as men were in those days, “deceitful” as were
their hearts, and “desperately wicked,” the law of God was written in
their hearts, and they often did by nature, proving that their nature
was not totally depraved, “the things contained in the law.”

These are the principle passages that the advocates of total depravity
cite to sustain their theory; but it is evident they fall far short
of proving any thing of the kind. They prove, what all know to be
true, that mankind have voluntarily corrupted themselves--some more
and some less. None are perfect, none are totally depraved, and there
are all grades and degrees, from the best man to the worst man. And
as we corrupt ourselves, we can reform ourselves. Corruption and
purity, right and wrong, evil and good, life and death, salvation and
damnation, heaven and hell, are set before us, and we have the ability
to turn from the wrong and lay hold on the good. But the terrible
theory, that we inherit by nature, corruption, evil, death, damnation,
and hell, from Adam, that they permeate our very nature, corrupt the
very springs of our life, constituting us “fire-brands of hell,” and
that nothing but a miracle by Almighty God can purify us, and save us
from endless burnings, I reject as utterly false and monstrous.

  “There’s the marble, there’s the chisel;
     Take them, work them to thy will;
   Thou alone must shape thy future,--
     Heaven give thee strength and skill.”

While in Edinburg, I had some conversation with a Presbyterian minister
on religious subjects. “Why,” said he, “you contend that Christians are
rewarded in this world for their piety and virtue. I dissent from you.
The Bible teaches me, that Christians are crushed to earth by the cross
they bear. Sinners have no such burden to carry.”

I remarked: “It is true that the early Christians, by their enthusiasm
in the Christian cause, often incurred the wrath of Jews and Pagans,
and were sometimes roughly handled. But this was not done because they
were good men and women, but because they were deemed enemies of truth
and righteousness--fanatics of a dangerous creed and party. The world
did not know that it was opposing God’s noblemen, and the highest
religious and moral truths, hence Christ, when in the agonies of death
from the hands of the unbelieving multitude, cried, ‘Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do.’ The trials, hardships and
persecutions they suffered, were incidental to the times, and are not
the legitimate results of a holy life.

“And here you mistake, my friend. You suppose that the suffering they
endured are the natural sequence of a divine life. In that you greatly
err. The advocates of any unpopular cause, let it be good or bad, right
or wrong, are sure to encounter opposition. Especially was this so
in the early days of the Christian era. The nations of the earth, in
those times, were ignorant, intolerant, cruel, and bloody--much more
so than at the present time. The early Christians laid hold of the
religious creeds of their day with a strong hand, tore them to atoms,
and scattered them to the four winds. This was more than the adherents
of those creeds could bear, and according to the intolerant and cruel
spirit of the times, they pursued the enemies of their ancient faith
with fire and sword. The Christian cause was unpopular; the Christians
were an insignificant minority, and the dominant party could not brook
their zeal for what they regarded to be a wretched delusion.

“Christianity is now popular among the civilized nations of the earth,
and its advocates are very differently situated from what they were
eighteen hundred years ago. There is now no cross for them to bear, as
that term was understood in the apostolic times. Those who come nearest
to bearing it in this country, are those who ‘trust in the living
God as the savior of all men.’ They are often contemptuously, cruelly
treated by the dominant parties; but thank God, if they are inclined
to revive the old persecutions, they have not the power to do so. But
the truly good in all ages and climes, are blessed, let their outward
circumstances be what they may. Virtue is a divine fount, whence flows
the elixir of life; a tree whose fruit heals the nations. The good
man’s soul is in harmony with truth and righteousness; he lives an
harmonious, heavenly life.”

“But I cannot see that there is as much difference in the happiness of
saints and sinners, as there is in their character. The latter seem
to enjoy themselves quite as well as the former, and sometimes even
better.”

“If the Bible is any authority, you are much mistaken. The wicked,
in that book, are said to be ‘servants,’ ‘captives,’ ‘strangers,’
‘foreigners,’ ‘wandering prodigals;’ Christians are said to be
‘children,’ ‘freemen,’ ‘fellow-citizens of the household of God,’
‘obedient children at home.’ The wicked are represented as ‘bearing a
heavy burden,’ ‘weary,’ ‘condemned,’ ‘dead,’ ‘blind,’ ‘hungry,’ ‘poor,’
‘thirsty,’ ‘miserable;’ but Christians as ‘entering into rest,’ being
‘justified,’ ‘alive,’ seeing ‘the Son of righteousness,’ ‘eating the
bread of God,’ drinking ‘the water of life,’ possessing ‘all things,’
and rejoicing ‘in the hope of the glory of God.’ The difference between
the two classes is clearly expressed thus: ‘There is _no peace_ to the
wicked’--‘_Great peace_ have they that love thy law.’

“Truly hath the poet said:

  “‘Heaven is not a region in the air,
   Nor hell a gulf we know not where;
   But heaven is where love and wisdom dwell,
   Their absence ’tis that makes a hell.
   Love absent--hatred enters in,
   Guilt and revenge, and every sin;
   Its smoke of torment still ascends--
   The deathless worm that never ends,--
   Till “death itself shall die.”’

“The _outer life_ of the good and bad, may be much alike, but their
_inner life_ is vastly different. Into one the sunshine of heaven is
poured, and perpetual summer reigns; into the other, darkness has free
access, and winter storms ever howl.”

Returning to Terre Haute on horseback, had some interesting talk with
my fellow travelers. The first was a Catholic.

“What shall I do to be saved?” I inquired.

“Believe in the Holy Catholic Church, and obey it in all things.”

“But cannot one be saved without being a Catholic? If one believes in
God, Christ, and obeys the divine law, cannot he be saved if he is not
a Catholic?”

“It is possible he may be; but it is not safe to rest one’s eternal
all on such ground. The church is the door into heaven, and I have
no evidence a soul can be saved without passing through that door.
You Protestants have great expectations of reaching heaven, but I am
fearful most of you will land where ‘the worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched.’”

The landlord of the house where I dined, was a zealous Methodist. “What
shall I do to be saved?” I asked.

“Believe in the Lord Jesus.”

“What must one believe concerning him?”

“That he is the second person in the adorable trinity, and willing and
able to save all who come to him.”

“Cannot one be saved without believing that Jesus is the second person
in the trinity?”

“No. If you do not believe that, you are an infidel, and no infidel can
be saved.”

“Do you think Catholics can be saved?”

“My bar-room will hold all the Catholics who will be saved. And as for
their popes, bishops and priests--I would not give a fig for their
chance. Infidelity is bad enough, but popery is worse.”

In the afternoon, I fell in company with a Presbyterian, and asked him,
“What I should do to be saved?”

“Believe in Christ.”

“What must I believe concerning Christ?”

“That he will save all he died for.”

“How many did he die for?”

“‘Are there _few_ that be saved?’ ‘Strive to enter in at the strait
gate, for narrow is the gate and strait is the way that leadeth to life
and _few_ there be that find it.’ These scriptures teach that only a
small part of mankind are embraced in the covenant of grace.”

Soon after parting with this man, I fell in company with a Campbellite,
and I asked, “What must one do to be saved?”

“Believe, be baptized, and repent.”

“Do you mean that no one can be saved hereafter, without faith,
baptism, and repentance in this world?”

“I have no evidence that any can.”

Alas! I mentally exclaimed, how selfish, contracted and partial are
the creeds of men. The Catholic consigns all to hell outside of his
church; the Methodist sends all to perdition who do not believe that
Jesus is the eternal God; the Presbyterian condemns all to everlasting
burnings, but the elect few; the Campbellite has no hope for any beyond
the grave, who do not adhere to his creed, and take water. The truth
concerning salvation, is all embraced in a few words. Jesus said, “Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul, and strength,
and thy neighbor as thyself.” And one of his apostles testifies that
“Love is the fulfilling of the law.” Whoever lives in harmony with this
law is saved, let his faith be what it may, and let him belong to
what party he may, or to no party. This is my faith with reference to
salvation, and does it not infinitely better correspond with reason,
and the character of God, than the narrow contracted systems just
stated by their advocates?

Where I stopped over night, I heard a Mormon deliver a discourse
in defence of Mormonism. He was an able man, well educated; and
he proved as clear as mud that the Latter-Day Saints are heaven’s
peculiar favorites. Every good Mormon, when he dies, we were told, is
transported to one of the stars, and becomes its king, and will there
reign over its inhabitants in regal splendor forever and ever. But
anti-Mormons are consigned to the infernal regions of Pluto, to be his
subjects eternally. He also told us, that Christ would come to this
earth personally within a few years. “I expect,” said he, “to live to
witness his second advent. He will be a Mormon, and will empower us to
destroy the Gentiles; and when the work shall be well done, the Saints
will possess the land. I warn you to flee from the wrath to come;
accept of mercy while mercy is offered you; for when Jesus comes, he
will shut the door, and your doom will be sealed.” He pretended to be
able to work miracles, and an old gentleman in the congregation arose
and wished him to restore his sight. “Do you believe I can?” asked
the speaker. “I will believe you can when you do the work,” the old
gentleman replied. “But do you believe _now_ that I can?” “No, sir.”
“Then I will not restore your sight.”

As soon as he was through the crowd cried, “Manford! Manford! Manford!”
I begged to be excused, but the people insisted that I should pitch
into Mormonism, and I finally spent an hour in reviewing it, and the
discourse just delivered. I commenced by remarking, that I wished to
make one statement, and to ask the speaker one question. Jesus told his
disciples on one occasion, that some of them would live to see him
come the second time, (Matt. xvi. 28) and he intimated to Peter that
John would be living when he would come. (John xxi. 23). “Now you,”
addressing the preacher, “told us, that coming has not taken place, but
will take place in a short time. The question I wish to ask is this:

“Is John _now living_?”

“He is,” replied the Mormon.

“Where is he?” I inquired.

“Up North, somewhere. We know he is living, for we have a document
signed by him.”

“Will you please show me that document.”

“It is not in my possession; our prophet has it.”

I then gave the history of the rise and progress of Mormonism; exposed
its knavery, imposture, polygamy. The Mormons present became very
angry, and one coarse-looking fellow shook his fist in my face. That
was the first and last time I ever came in contact with Mormons. I was
probably too severe in my remarks; but I was so disgusted at the man’s
defense of Mormonism, I gave free utterance to my indignation.

Self and Mrs. Manford journeyed to Cincinnati. We traveled in a buggy,
and had a delightful jaunt, as the weather was pleasant, the roads
good, and friends plentiful--all except the last, in striking contrast
with the other journey we took--the bridal tour. We were absent three
weeks, and I preached nearly every day. Attended the annual meeting of
the Indiana State Convention, where we met many friends from different
portions of the state. Then proceeded to Louisville, Ky., and attended
the annual convocation of the Kentucky State Convention. From thence
journeyed to Cincinnati, where I bought printing materials for the
_Teacher_, and then returned home.




CHAPTER XIII.


  MOVED TO INDIANAPOLIS--EXTENSIVE TRAVELING--HENRY WARD BEECHER--A
  FOSSILED CALVINIST--SUPPOSED TO BE AN ORTHODOX PREACHER--DEBATE
  IN NEW PHILADELPHIA--STRIFE BETWEEN THE NORTH AND SOUTH--THE OLD
  CONVENTION DEAD--THE NEW CONVENTION ORGANIZED--DISCUSSION IN
  SPRINGFIELD, ILL.--ABRAHAM LINCOLN--GOD IS LOVE--IS MERCIFUL--IS
  JUST--IS HOLY--TRAVEL IN ILLINOIS--CONVERSATION WITH A PRESBYTERIAN
  CLERGYMAN ON THE ORIGIN OF HELL--IN IOWA CITY, AND OTHER PLACES
  IN IOWA--HOME AGAIN--W. J. CHAPLIN--DISCUSSION WITH BENJAMIN
  FRANKLIN--DEBATE IN COVINGTON--DISCUSSION WITH MR. RUSSELL--PUBLISH
  THE “ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY REASONS”--REVIEW OF “UNIVERSALISM AGAINST
  ITSELF”--PUBLISH ANOTHER BOOK--OLIVE BRANCH DISCONTINUED--TRAVELING
  FAR AND NEAR.

In 1846, I moved to Indianapolis, the capital of Indiana. It being
in the center of the state, and the most important town therein, I
deemed it a better locality in which to publish the _Teacher_ than
Terre Haute. It continued to be issued twice a month, Dr. J. H. Jordan
assisting; and Mrs. Manford writing editorial, helping mail the paper,
and keeping the books. I was often absent, but the faithful doctor
and the “better half” always sent the _Teacher_ out regularly on its
mission. Its circulation rapidly increased after this change of base;
and being in the geographical center of the state, I could reach
all parts of it with less travel than before. I still continued to
make the saddle my home a considerable portion of the time. Visited
and preached annually, more or less, in nearly every county in the
state, and Indiana covers a large territory, being two hundred and
fifty miles north and south, and one hundred and fifty east and west.
I also extended my peregrinations into Ohio, Kentucky, Illinois,
Iowa and Michigan. Friends of liberal principles were every where
multiplying, more and more interest was taken in the good cause, and
my congregations were generally increasing. I was much encouraged,
although my labor at home and abroad was much augmented. I often wished
I could divide myself into a dozen parts, that I might be in as many
places at once.

There were but few of the liberal faith in Indianapolis. About the time
I moved there, B. F. Foster commenced preaching in the city, in the
old Court House--a dirty and out of the way place. But few attended
his meetings, and after one year’s effort to establish a congregation,
he returned to Madison, where he had previously resided. C. Cravens
subsequently made a feeble effort in the same direction, and failed.
After I left, Mr. Foster returned, and resumed his labors, and has been
successful in establishing a good society.

Henry Ward Beecher was pastor of one of the Presbyterian societies part
of the time I resided there, and I found him to be a liberal and jovial
fellow. Orthodoxy evidently did not trouble him then any more than it
does now, and his hearers sometimes doubted his soundness on the “fine
points.” He would occasionally preach politics; and his sharp thrusts
would send his democratic church members headlong out of the house. I
once asked him if he believed the Creator would eternally punish us for
the sins of this life, and he evaded giving a direct answer.

There was another Presbyterian preacher in Indianapolis by the name of
Gurley--a fossiled Calvinist. He and Beecher subscribed to the same
creed, but in faith and spirit they were as far apart as the poles. I
attended his meeting once, and he thought he would give me a hard hit.
“I will relate,” said he, “how a noted Universalist died. Ethan Allen,
a revolutionary soldier, was on his death bed. When well, he was loud
in defense of Universalism. But when he came to die it failed him. His
daughter asked him just before he breathed his last, if she should
cherish the faith he had taught, or that her mother had taught her.
Believe as your mother believes, said the dying man.” I met him the
next day, and told him that Ethan Allen was an avowed Deist. “It is the
same thing,” said he. “If you think so, you need not be alarmed about
your salvation, for all now admit that children and idiots are safe.”
This is the same Gurley who has figured in Washington as chaplain of
Congress.

Soon after moving to Indianapolis, I had a discussion in New
Philadelphia, in the southern portion of Indiana. In going there,
I stopped over night in a little village; told the landlord of the
inn that I would speak to the people if he would give notice. As my
host was a Methodist, the people inferred the preacher was one of
his brethren. “The Lord is good unto all, and his tender mercies are
over all his works,” was my text, and I dwelt on the evidences of
God’s goodness in nature, providence, and the Bible. I emphasized the
conclusion, that as God is unchangeable he always will, in this world
and the world to come, through all time and through all eternity, be
good unto all, and his tender mercies be ever over all his works. As
God is good to all, he blesses all _now_, and as he always will be good
to all, he _ever will_ bless all mankind. I did not say that all would
be saved, only that God would ever bless mankind. I requested a man,
who I was told was a Methodist, to close the meeting. Before praying he
remarked, “My brethren, we have heard the gospel to-night in all its
fullness. Glory to God for such truths. They are the bread of life.
May we all feast on them and live forever.” Another said, “I bless God
for what we have heard this evening. I have been so near heaven, I
have felt like taking the shoes from my feet. Bless God for the word
of life.” I spent the night with a Methodist brother, and he doubtless
thought I was a Methodist. I practiced no deception--told the truth
clearly, boldly. No one questioned me concerning my denominational
relations, and I said nothing on that subject. The nature of the
soul is in harmony with truth and righteousness, and when the wisdom
of heaven is unfolded, it is intuitively responded to by men of all
creeds, provided their prejudices are not aroused by offensive names,
or by unpopular truths stated in too pointed terms. If I had told
the people I was a Universalist, the whole discourse would have been
pronounced heresy.

At another time, I was traveling on Sunday; coming to a meeting-house
where a congregation was assembling, I dismounted, and took a seat
with the congregation. I knew no one, and I suppose no one knew me.
The expected preacher did not appear, and some one arose to dismiss
the assembly. I told the people I was a minister and would deliver
a discourse if they wished me to. All seemed gratified to hear a
stranger, and I talked nearly two hours to about five hundred people. I
pursued the same course I did on the other occasion--said nothing about
other people’s faith, called what I preached the gospel. I counted
some twenty Universalists in the congregation; at least, I judged they
were such from expressions of their countenances when I came out were
pretty clear on Universalist ground. I spent the rest of the day with a
Presbyterian deacon, and he evidently did not suspect I was a heretic.

The discussion in New Philadelphia continued two days. My opponent was
a Presbyterian minister. We had some skirmishing before the regular
battle commenced. I delivered a discourse on Saturday evening, and he
replied. He spoke on Sunday morning, and I replied in the afternoon.
Monday and Tuesday we met face to face, and discussed six hours each
day, when he retreating left me in possession of the field. The
discussion caused much excitement, for the liberal faith was unknown
to most of the people--they had no idea that any thing could be said in
its favor. One man offered to bet his farm that I would not be able to
make a second speech. A good society could have been established there,
but no minister could be obtained.

The strife between the Northern and Southern people, which ultimated
in the late rebellion, disturbed the Universalist denomination in
Indiana long before the war commenced. The contention though was not
about slavery, but grew out of the antagonism between people from those
two sections of country. Southern and Central Indiana was settled
chiefly by emigrants from the South, and unfortunately they cherished
prejudices against the Yankees. The Indiana State Convention would
not join the United States Convention, because it was controlled by
Northern people. Jonathan Kidwell, who had long been preaching in
the West, resided in Indiana, was from Kentucky. In his younger days
he was a Methodist minister; then a New Light; and finally became
a Universalist. He possessed much intellectual power, and was well
read on many subjects, although not versed in the technicalities of
knowledge. He had long resided in Indiana, and was well known. Some
forty years ago, he had a discussion in Indianapolis with a Methodist
minister. It was published by Mr. K., and widely circulated. He had
been editor of the _Star in the West_, and while I resided in Indiana,
he published a monthly magazine, called the _Philometh Encyclopediæ_.
He was, as remarked, from Kentucky, pro-slavery, and had but little
love for Yankees.

Soon after I settled in Lafayette, he commenced a war on Eastern
preachers, calling them “silk-stocking gentry,” sent out West to
enlighten the heathen. He complimented me by calling me a “Texan
ranger,” “a conspirator,” and a “little bishop.” Many of the
Universalists in the state were anxious to be connected with the
United States Convention, but Mr. Kidwell and his friends always
opposed such union. This difference disturbed the harmony of some of
our associational and conventional meetings, and did much mischief in
the state generally. I was young, and doubtless indiscreet in some
statements I published in the _Teacher_, but Mr. K. was very coarse
and abusive in his attacks. The State Convention met in Terre Haute
while I resided there, and one of Mr. Kidwell’s friends reported that
he had _fifty charges_ against me, which he intended to lay before the
council. When motion was made to adjourn, I stated what I had heard,
and demanded a presentation of the charges threatened. This brought
G. C. McCune to his feet, and some one proposed the matter be left to
six persons, each party choosing three, and their decision with regard
to the charges be final. Both parties consented. I selected my men,
but the other party did nothing. The year after, the Convention met in
Dublin; one of Mr. K.’s friends proposed that I be disfellowshiped on
the ground that I pretended to have received a Letter of Fellowship in
the East when I had not, and was therefore an impostor. The resolution
was laid on the table. I then came out with a long article in the
_Teacher_ about my troubles in Indiana, and Mr. Kidwell made that
article the basis of charges which he presented to the Convention the
next year. It met that year in Laconia, in the extreme southern portion
of the state, and the council was composed chiefly of delegates from
some dead societies in that locality. The result was as I expected,
and rather hoped would be--the council voted me guilty of the charges.
But that act killed the Convention. The White River, Wabash and Upper
Wabash Associations immediately withdrew from it, and in a few months a
new Convention was organized in my parlor in Indianapolis, and it soon
joined the United States Convention. The old Convention met once or
twice and then died; and about the same time Mr. Kidwell departed this
life, full of years; and soon after, his printing office, which was
then run by E. M. Knapp, was destroyed by fire. After the new order of
things was inaugurated, peace and harmony reigned in our councils, and
the good cause was more prosperous.

Liberal sentiments were making some progress in central Illinois, and I
was invited to visit that region and hold a discussion in Springfield
with a Methodist preacher. I had never been in that portion of the
state, and it was a long journey there, for there was no railroad
connecting those two capitals in those days. In going to Springfield, I
stopped at Mt. Pulaski, Ill., and delivered several discourses. It is
on a high mound, in the midst of vast prairies--a beautiful situation.
Here I met, for the first time, D. P. Bunn, who resided in the place
and preached there, and in the region all around. He still lives in
a neighboring town, Decatur, and is yet faithfully discharging his
ministerial duties. He is an excellent man, a faithful minister, and
dear friend. He has labored long and hard in the moral field, and God
has blessed him and his labors. Mr. Bunn accompanied me to Springfield.
Arriving there, I found that the preacher who had agreed to debate with
me, was not inclined to keep his promise, and Mr. Lewis, the most noted
controversalist in that section, was chosen to take his place. He was a
Methodist minister of much ability, and very zealous in his cause. He
had recently had a discussion with Mr. Bunn, and was pretty well posted
concerning Universalism. We debated four days in the Representatives’
Hall of the capitol, in the presence of vast assemblies. The discussion
produced much excitement in Springfield, and all parties attended it.
I remember seeing Mr. Lincoln there punctually every day and every
night. He often nodded his head to me when I made a strong point.
Little did I think, or he think, what was to be his future position and
history.

In my first speech, I offered some arguments in favor of the
restitution of all things. God is love. The Bible says, “God is love;”
and all God’s works say, he is love.

  “Could we with ink the ocean fill,
     And were the skies of parchments made,
   Were every blade of grass a quill,
     And every man a scribe by trade;
   To write the love of God above
     Would drain the ocean dry,
   Nor could the scroll contain the whole
     Though stretch’d from sky to sky.”

As love is the moral nature of God, well might the great Gentile
apostle exclaim, “I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other thing, shall separate us
from the love of God, which is manifested in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
Rom. viii. 38, 39. Can love so broad, so deep, so high, so vast, so
enduring, so mighty, consign countless millions of its creations to
interminable agony? Can an ocean of love be the source of an ocean of
woe? Can the best tree bear the worst fruit? Can the purest fountain
emit the most deadly poison? As God is love, while man exists, he
must be his friend, his benefactor, his savior. All creeds say God
is love. The old Pagans extolled Jupiter, called him the great, the
magnificent, the glorious Jupiter, but according to their mythology,
he was a beastly monster. So modern theologies say God is love, but
they attribute to him passions and deeds the devil might envy. God
is love, and all his purposes, and all his works perfectly harmonize
with infinite love. Universal blessedness is the sequence of the
proposition--God is love.

As God is love, he is just--just in all his purposes, in all his works.
Would it be just to force into existence man or angel, knowing that
existence would prove an endless curse? Force man into this world,
force him through this world, force him into the grave, force him into
the spirit-world, force him into an endless hell! That is the programme
of heaven, concerning millions of mankind, according to popular creeds.
Man is the victim of all this, if Mr. Lewis is right. Is there any
justice in this? The whole scheme is black with crime, and reeking
with vengeance, as it culminates in the ruin of the universe. Justice
does no such work. Justice is universal right, and it labors to bring
about right; and justice will not be satisfied till all mankind are
_right_--right in character, in condition, in life. Universal salvation
is the sequence of the proposition--God is just.

God is merciful. Mercy is only another manifestation of love, and leads
to the same result. The Bible says much about the mercy of God--he is
of “great mercy,” “plenteous in mercy,” “rich in mercy.” His mercy is
said to be universal--“his tender mercies are over all his works.” His
mercy is everlasting--“the mercy of the Lord endureth forever.” The
mercy of the Lord then is great, universal and everlasting. It is by
the mercy of God we are now blessed; as his mercy is universal, there
is no place in the universe where his mercy will not reach us; and as
it is eternal, the time will never come when he will not bless us.
Universal blessedness then, is the sequence of the proposition--God is
merciful.

God is holy. Holiness is a characteristic of love. Holiness delights
in holiness, in purity, in happiness. Good men are holy in a finite
degree, and they pray, and plan, and labor, to extend holiness. God
is holy in an infinite degree, and he purposes universal holiness.
Will he then ever place any of us where we cannot be holy, but must
lie down in depravity, in corruption, in sin, forever and ever? Mr.
Lewis affirms that he will thus dispose of millions of mankind. But
that is impossible, as God is a holy being. Here is a man; and because
his children are disobedient, he digs a dungeon, chains them in its
darkness, feeds them on bread and water; but this is not enough; he
enters that dungeon morning, noon and evening, and beats them half to
death. He continues this barbarous treatment for days, weeks, months,
years, yea, as long as they live. Would you call that the work of
holiness? God, it is said, will deal infinitely worse than that inhuman
wretch.

  “Far in the deep where darkness dwells,
     A land of horror and despair,
   Justice has built a dismal hell,
     And laid her store of vengeance there.”

Into this infernal dungeon, we are told, the Creator will thrust
countless millions of mankind, swing the door upon them, and there
they must remain the helpless victims of every vile passion, not for a
day, but to all eternity; all grace, mercy, love, withdrawn from them;
deprived of all opportunity, of all power, all means to reform their
lives, and doomed by the holy God to be unholy through the eternal
ages. Say not this is the work of holiness; say not the holy God will
do what would be so unholy, so diabolical. As long as God is holy he
will seek the holiness of his creatures, and as he is infinitely and
everlastingly holy, in all places and in all times he will seek man’s
holiness and happiness. Universal salvation is the sequence of the
proposition--God is holy.

I spoke on Sunday after the discussion closed, in the Hall, and the
spacious room was crowded to its full capacity. Mr. Bunn afterwards
labored in Springfield, then L. C. Marvin and J. Marvin, his brother;
then A. Bosserman, and at the present time, H. R. Nye is the pastor
of the society. Our friends have a good meeting-house, and liberal
principles have a strong hold in the capital of Illinois.

I journeyed to Alton, passing through Carlinville, Brighton, over the
prairie where Girard and Virden now stand. There was nothing there
then but wild prairie. From Alton I proceeded to Jerseyville, a small
burg then, but now a beautiful town, and delivered my message. Thence
to Exeter, Naples, and on to Macomb, through Rushville. In all these
places I spoke to the people. In Macomb we now have an excellent
society and a fine meeting-house. Have often lectured there since my
first visit. Had some talk here with a Presbyterian clergyman by the
name of Chase, I think.

“You do not believe in hell; but that is as clearly revealed as heaven.”

“You are mistaken. I do believe in the hell the Bible speaks of, and
which wicked men experience. But I have no faith in the hell of human
creeds. God never revealed it; it was developed from the darkness of
Paganism.”

“You cannot prove that.”

“I think I can. Nearly all learned men of all denominations admit, that
the Old Testament does not reveal an endless hell. But from Moses to
Christ the Pagans believed in it. As heaven had not revealed such a
place, the vain imaginations of men were the father and mother of it.
Hesiod, a Greek poet, who lived eight hundred years before Christ tells
us, that hell is so far from heaven, that it would take a mass of iron
eighteen days to fall from the latter to the former place. The gate of
hell was supposed to be guarded by a dog having fifty heads, and to
make escape impossible, the horrid place was surrounded by a river of
fire, called Phlegethon. Virgil, another Heathen poet says:

  “‘Here rolls the roaring, flaming tide of hell,
   And thundering rocks the fiery torrent swell.’

“The punishment of hell is thus described by the same writer:

  “‘Here sits in bloody robes the Fury fell,
   By night and day to watch the gates of hell.
   Here you begin terrific groans to hear,
   And sounding lashes rise upon the ear.
   On every side the damned their fetters grate,
   And curse, ’mid clanking chains, their wretched fate.’

“One sinner is bound to a wheel of fire on which he must revolve
eternally. Another is tortured with endless hunger and thirst; he is in
a lake of pure water up to his chin, with the most delicious fruit a
few inches from him, but he cannot get a drop of water nor a particle
of food into his mouth. Danaus’ forty-nine daughters, for murdering
their husbands, were doomed to fill a leaky tub with water, drawn
from a well with a sieve. Another victim of the gods was chained to a
rock, and vultures fed on his heart and entrails, which grew as fast
as devoured. Virgil, also thus enlightens us concerning some of the
inhabitants of hell:

  “‘At hell’s dread mouth a thousand monsters wait;--
   _Grief_ weeps, and _Vengeance_ bellows in the gate;
   Base _Want_, low _Fear_, and _Famine’s_ lawless rage,
   And pale _Disease_, and slow, repining _Age_;
   Fierce, formidable _Fiends_ the portals keep,
   With _Pain_, _Toil_, _Death_, and Death’s half-brother, _Sleep_.
   There Joys, embittered by _Remorse_, appear,
   Daughter of _Guilt_; here storms destructive _War_.
   Mad _Discord_ there her snaky tresses tore;
   Here stretched on iron beds the _Furies_ roar;
   And close by _Lerna’s_ hissing monster stands
   _Briareus_ dreadful with a hundred hands;
   There stern _Geryon_ raged; and all around
   Fierce _Harpies_ screamed, and direful _Gorgons_ frowned.’

“This, sir, was the Pagan hell--believed by Pagans, preached by Pagan
priests, hundreds of years before Jesus Christ brought a future life
to light. Did he teach an endless hell? If so, he taught Paganism,
not the wisdom of God. Have I not proved that the dogma of endless
punishment originated in Heathen darkness? You admit that it is not
taught in the Old Testament; that the Jews did not believe in it in
the days of Moses or the prophets. But the Pagans did believe in it
in those days, therefore it was not revealed from heaven, but was the
product of their own deformed minds.”

“Christians do not believe in the Pagan hell, but in the Christian
hell; the Pagans corrupted the truth.”

“The hell of modern creeds is as horrible as the hell of Paganism. I
will give you some description of hell by Christian authors, and you
will admit that I am correct. Rev. Isaac Ambrose, an English divine,
and a man of great talent, contends that the Heathen did not represent
hell bad enough. Alluding to the Pagan poets just quoted, he says:

“‘Let poets feign of Tantalus’s tortures, Prometheus’s vultures,
Ixion’s wheels, and Charon’s rowing; these are far short to express
the pains of those that rage in hell. There plagues have no ease,
cries have no help, time has no end, place no redemption. It is the
dark prison where the Tares [the damned] are chained, and the wicked
bound in fetters of fire and darkness. Are there not wonderful engines,
sharp and sure instruments of revenge? fiery brimstone, pitchy sulpher,
red-hot chains, flaming whips, scorching darkness? Will you any more?
The worm is immortal, cold intolerable, stench unendurable, fire
unquenchable, darkness palpable.... What music affords the place but
roaring and crying and howling? Cursing is their hymns, wailing their
tunes, blasphemies their ditties, tears their notes, lamentations their
songs, screeching their strains; these are their morning and evening
songs. What mean these chains and whips, and links and scourges? iron
chains, whips of steel, fiery links, knotty scourges. Furies shake
their bolts to frighten souls; the irons strike through their ears,
and the hooked engines tear out their bowels, as if the torment of the
damned were the delight of devils.’

“‘Oh, what a bed is this for delicate and dainty persons; no feathers,
but fire; no friends, but furies; no ease, but fetters; no light,
but smoke; no clock nor chimes to pass away the night, but timeless
eternity. A fire, intolerable; a fire, burning, never dying! Oh,
immortal pains!... What torment, what calamity can be compared to the
shadow of this? The wicked shall be crowded together like brick in a
fiery furnace. There is no servant to fan cold air on their tormented
parts--not so much as the chink where the least puff of wind might
enter to cool them.’

“Another Orthodox poet waxes eloquent in describing the infernal
regions:

  “‘Pale phantoms, hideous specters, shapes which scare
   The damned themselves, and terrify despair,
   Gorgons and harpies, and chimeras dire,
   And swarms of hissing serpents, hissing fire.’

“Dr. Trapp thus writes of the rivers of hell and their fiery tide:

  “‘Fires spout in cataracts, or in furies flow--
   In bubbling eddies roll the fiery tide,
   And sulphurous surges on each other ride.’

“The Orthodox Pollock gives this idea of hell:

  “‘Wide was the place,
   And deep as wide, and ruinous as deep.
   Beneath, I saw a lake of burning fire,
   With tempest tost perpetually, and still,
   The waves of fiery darkness ’gainst the rocks
   Of dark damnation broke, and music made
   Of melancholy sort, and over head,
   And all around, wind wared with wind, storm howled
   To storm, and lightning, forked lightning, crossed,
   Of sullen wrath.’

“The Pagan account of hell is tame compared to the Orthodox
representation of it. A Methodist elder, a short time since, in
Lafayette, Ind., told his hearers, that hell was so hot, that if a soul
was taken out of it and put into a red hot smelting furnace, he would
freeze to death in five minutes.”

“I will not talk with you; for you are making sport of a very serious
subject.”

“I am merely relating the common view of hell, as it is preached all
over the land.”

“I do not believe in such a hell; neither do I preach it. The wicked
will be banished from the presence of God, there to remain forever.”

“Make hell as mild as you please; put out all its fires, throw away all
its brimstone, chains and pitchforks, and say, it is only a _condition_
of sin, darkness, mental anguish, and moral death, and it then is awful
beyond imagination. Fire, red hot wheels, boiling lead, as means of
torture, give only a faint conception of the horrors of such a state,
if it is to continue forever. As John Wesley said, ‘What is gained if
there is no material fire in hell, when _all admit_, that if there is
no material fire there, there is _something worse_.’”

From Macomb I proceeded to Burlington, Iowa, and thence to Iowa
City. Here I lectured several times. I. M. Westfall was residing and
preaching there. It was then a small town, but now it is a large and
flourishing place. Our society owns a meeting-house, and other valuable
property.

Lectured in West Liberty, Tipton, Rochester, Muscatine, Washington,
Davenport, and some other places in Iowa, and then returned to
Indianapolis by the most direct route. This was a long and laborious
journey; traveled about one thousand miles, and delivered many
discourses, one third of which were in places where the people were
entirely ignorant of our faith, and in the rest they knew but very
little concerning it.

A short time before the new Convention was organized, I was in North
Manchester, in the northern part of Indiana, where a youth introduced
himself to me, as William J. Chaplin, and said he had walked fifteen
miles to attend my meeting. He also stated that he was studying
theology, and intended to be a minister. I encouraged him in his
purpose, and shortly afterwards he delivered his first sermon. He
has been in the ministry ever since, and has labored extensively,
faithfully, and effectually, in Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, and Illinois.
At the present time he resides at Dowagiac, Mich., and devotes most of
his time to the profession of his choice.

About this time I had an oral discussion with Benjamin Franklin, on
three subjects--The General Judgment--Universal Salvation--Endless
Misery. We discussed each proposition six hours. The debate was
published by both parties, and makes a book of three hundred and
fifty-nine pages. It has had a wide circulation--three edition having
been issued. Mr. Franklin is, for he is still living, an influential
minister, editor and author, in his denomination. He has resided in
Cincinnati many years, and publishes a large weekly religious paper in
that city.

I also had a debate in Covington, Ind., with Mr. French, a Baptist
clergyman, which continued four days. He was pastor of the Baptist
church in that place, and his people had immense faith in his ability
to demolish the doctrines of the Restitution. But he labored under
a great disadvantage, as he could not extemporize; and how he wrote
his speeches was a mystery to me; he must have worked hard during the
intermissions. But his labor and wit did not save him. His friends
were disappointed with his effort, and he soon after left Covington.
The discussion was held in the Baptist meeting-house, and very large
congregations listened to the arguments, _pro_ and _con_.

Soon after this, I spent four days in discussion in Park county, Ind.,
with Mr. Russell, a Campbellite minister. The neighborhood was chiefly
of the preacher’s faith; I put up with one of his brethren while the
debate was progressing. They all treated me kindly, and we parted in
friendship. Mr. R. now resides in Iowa, and is a noted man in his
denomination.

In the midst of this arduous labor, I wrote and published the “One
Hundred and Fifty Reasons for Believing in the Salvation of Mankind,”
about twenty thousand copies of which has been distributed, and I think
it has done a good work.

Alexander Hall, of Ohio, published a book, denominated “Universalism
Against Itself,” which was extensively circulated in the West. He
has since turned infidel, and says he wrote the book to please the
Orthodox; he was probably an infidel when he wrote it. But his
hypocrisy not then being known, and as the book might deceive some of
its readers, I employed Dr. Jordan to answer it in the _Teacher_. His
review occupied a portion of the _Teacher_ for one year, and when it
was finished, it was published in book form, making a volume of nearly
four hundred pages. An edition of two thousand copies has been sold.
It is a strong and vigorous work, and completely answers most of the
objections urged in all quarters against the Universalist construction
of the Bible.

I also published a little book of two hundred pages, called “Truth
_vs._ Error,” composed of selections from some of our best writers. One
thousand copies of it were distributed.

In 1848, I commenced issuing the paper weekly, calling it the _Western
Olive Branch_. Soon after, I unwisely moved it to Cincinnati, hoping
it would have a more general circulation if it was published in the
“Queen City” of the West. But unfortunately, I had a partner, H. Torry,
who proved to be a dead weight on my hands, and to throw him off I had
to dispose of the paper, which I did, to J. A. Gurley, and he connected
it with the _Star in the West_. After this brief partnership of a few
months, resulting thus disastrously, I returned to Indianapolis, and
devoted all my time and attention to preaching. When this transfer was
made, the circulation of the _Olive Branch_ was thirty-three hundred,
and it had been published nearly nine years. I was sorry to give it up,
but deemed it best to do so under the circumstances.

The succeeding eighteen months, I was from home most of the time,
traveling in Indiana, Illinois, Kentucky, Michigan and Ohio, preaching
wherever I could have a hearing. On horseback I went from Cincinnati to
Lake Erie, and from Lake Erie to Cincinnati; lectured in Springfield,
Dayton, Columbus, Upper Sandusky, and in many other places. I also
journeyed west as far as St. Louis, and northwest to Iowa City.




CHAPTER XIV.


  CONCLUDED TO GO TO ST. LOUIS--COMMENCED THE GOLDEN ERA--ASSOCIATION
  IN CRAWFORDSVILLE--DEBATE IN DAYTON--MAN IN GOD’S IMAGE--GOD THE
  FATHER OF ALL--MAN IMMORTAL--MAN A SPIRIT--HIGH WATERS--IN ST.
  LOUIS--WHY MOVED TO ST. LOUIS--BUT FEW FRIENDS--FIRST JOURNEY IN
  MISSOURI--WET, HUNGRY, OUT IN THE COLD--IN TROY--IN ASHLY--FOUR
  BROTHERS--IN LOUISIANA--OPPOSITION IN LONDON--IN HANNIBAL--GOOD
  FRIENDS--QUESTIONED IN PALMYRA ABOUT SLAVERY--CONVERSATION
  ON JUDGMENT--IN MEMPHIS--QUESTIONED--A PRESBYTERIAN PREACHER
  REPLIED--WAS TO DEBATE IN NEWARK--COVERED WITH ICE--MISSOURI
  RIVER--DISCUSSION IN GEORGETOWN--IN SOUTHERN MISSOURI--QUESTIONED IN
  WARSAW--IN JEFFERSON CITY--HARD WORK IN DANVILLE--RETURNED TO ST.
  LOUIS.

Having disposed of the paper I had published for several years,
I resolved to move to St. Louis, and establish one in that city.
Accordingly, in the fall of 1850, I went to St. Louis and issued the
first number of a magazine of twenty-four pages, called the _Golden
Era_. I proposed publishing it monthly, at one dollar per year.
Returning to Indianapolis, I remained there till the succeeding spring,
and then left that place for the new home on the banks of the “Father
of Waters.” We, that is, Mrs. Manford, baby Mae, and self, with horse
and carriage, proceeded to Crawfordsville, Ind., where we attended the
annual meeting of the Upper Wabash Association. Dr. I. D. Williamson
was present, and all were much edified with two or three excellent
discourses by that gifted clergyman. Josiah Davis was then residing and
preaching in Crawfordsville. For many years he was a prominent minister
of the United Brethren Church; but his faith had gradually enlarged,
and for three years previous to this date, he had been an ardent
defender of the doctrines of the Restitution.

Proceeded to Dayton, and there spent four days in discussion with Mr.
Russell--the same man I had previously debated with in Park county.
One of his propositions affirmed that the “wicked will be destroyed,”
and by that he meant, _annihilated_, soul and body. “Man,” he said,
“by nature is all mortal; and immortality is only conferred in the
resurrection on those who are regenerated in this world.” I combatted
this materialistic position thus:

As I read the Bible, man is a child of God, created in his image, and
is therefore a spirit, endowed with an immortal nature. The account we
have of the creation of our race runs thus: “And God said, Let us make
man in our _image_, after our _likeness_.... So God created man in his
own _image_, in the _image_ of God created he him.” Gen. i. 26, 27. “In
the day that God created man, in the _likeness_ of God made he him.”
Gen. v. 1. It is also said, “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall
his blood be shed; for in the _image_ of God made he man.” Gen. ix. 6.
In the first book of the Bible, then, it is repeated four times, that
man was created in the image of God. Some tell us, that image was lost
in Adam, and that all his posterity have been created in the _image_
of the infernal, but this is not the theology of the New Testament.
The apostle Paul says, “Forasmuch as man IS the _image_ and _glory_
of God.” 1 Cor. ii. 7. And another apostle testifies to the same,
“Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we men,
which ARE _made_ in the _similitude_ (or image) of God.” James iii. 9.
We may then safely affirm, that mankind from the morning of creation
to the present time, have been created in the _image_ and _glory_ of
God. The fish of the sea, the fowls of the air, the beasts of the
forest, were all created--but not in the image of God. Man only is thus
distinguished.

The record cannot mean, that the _body_ is in the image of God, for
God is a spirit. The body rather is in the image of the _earthy_. “And
as we have borne the image of the _earthy_.” 1 Cor. xv. 49. But the
body is not the whole of man. There is a thinking, reasoning, willing,
propelling power within this physical organism. It is designated by
various names in the Bible. It is called a “spirit,” the “inward man,”
“the mind.” It is doubtless this inward man that is created in the
image and glory of God.

As we have seen, the apostle asserts, that the outer man, the body,
is in the image of the earthy. What does he mean? Doubtless that all
the elements, laws, forces, of the physical universe are represented,
imaged in man’s physical form; hence, wise men in ancient and modern
times have regarded man physically as an epitome, microcosm of the
outer universe. It is then the _inward man_, the _spirit_, that is in
the image and glory of God, and consequently all the elements of the
Great Spirit are represented, imaged in man’s spiritual organism, but
in a finite degree. God is a spirit, an immortal spirit, a being of
infinite wisdom, love and power. Man’s spirit being in his image, and
partaking of his glory, must possess all these qualities, but in a
finite degree. He is a finite spirit, a spark from the central sun, and
partakes of the immortality, wisdom, love and power of God.

The objector has said, “I know man has a body for I see it; but I
do not see the spirit you talk about, and cannot believe it has an
existence.” Do you not see that this statement lands you in Atheism?
You believe there is a physical universe for you can see it, or at
least, part of it. But you cannot see God, therefore, according to
your reasoning, there is no God. The apostle Paul did not reason in
this unphilosophical manner. He said, “The things that are _seen_ are
_temporal_; the things that are _unseen_ are _eternal_.” As God is an
invisible spirit, and the inward man is in his image, of course it
must be invisible to mortal eyes.

The truth is, all the controlling forces of the universe are as
invisible to our material vision, as are God and the spirits which are
in his image. The laws of gravity, of repulsion, of cohesion, are all
invisible; but they are at work in all things, from a pebble to the
sun. We cannot see them, but we experience their effects every moment
of our existence. We cannot see electricity, but we behold it rend the
mountain oak, and melt the hardest metal; we cannot see the atmosphere,
but we behold it prostrate the forest, and dash to atoms the work of
man; we cannot see steam, but we see its effect--it drives the heavy
train on its iron track, and propels the giant ship across the ocean
against wind and tide. So we cannot see God, only as we behold him in
all his works.

  “God hath a being, and that we may see
   In the fold of the flower, the leaf of the tree;
   In the sun of the noon-day, the star of the night,
   In the storm-cloud of darkness, the rainbow of light,
   In the waves of the ocean, the furrow of land,
   In the mountain of granite, the atom of sand;
   Turn where we may, from the sky to the sod,
   Where can we gaze that we see not a God?”

We cannot see the spirit that inhabits this mortal body, but we can
behold its work. It builds up and controls the body; gives strength to
the muscles, vigor to the hand, brightness to the eye, manliness to the
form, and genius to the brain. It constructs our railroads, steamships,
and performs all the works of art. It employs human bone and muscle;
but they are only its servants; the indwelling spirit plans all,
executes all. What the spirit is to the body, God is to the universe. I
can as easily comprehend the Great Spirit as I can my own spirit; I can
as easily understand how God can be present in the whole universe, as
I can understand how my spirit can be present in the whole body. Take
the spirit from the body and the body dies; take God from the universe
and the universe would die--become an immense corpse. When we know our
spirit, we know God; when we know our body, we have a philosophy of
the universe. Man, then, is godlike in his nature; he is a spirit, has
the attributes of a spirit, one of which is _immortality_. If God is
immortal, man is, as he is in the image of God. I see no way to avoid
the conclusion, if the premise is admitted, and if we deny that, we
discard the plain teachings of the Bible.

What has been said concerning man being in his nature in the divine
image, is confirmed by the scriptural testimony, that God is the
_Father_ of mankind. “Have we not all one Father?” Mal. ii. 10. “For
to us there is but one God the Father.” 1 Cor. viii. 6. “One God and
Father of all.” Eph. iv. 6. Jesus instructs us to pray, “Our Father who
art in heaven.” “O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh.” Num. xvi.
22. This is repeated (Num. xxvii. 16) and the apostle Paul (Heb. xii.
9) quoting it substitutes “_Father_ of spirits” for “God of spirits.”
As God is the Father of mankind, we are his children--his offspring,
hence the declaration, “Inasmuch as we are the offspring of God.” Acts
xvii. 29. Children always partake of the nature of their parents.
As God is the “Father of spirits,” we must partake of his spiritual
nature--be in his immortal image. This body is of mother-earth and
partakes of earth’s perishable nature; the spirit is of Father-God, and
partakes of his immortal nature. And when death severs the connecting
link between body and spirit, the earthy returns to the earth whence it
came, and the spirit to God whence it came.

If these premises are correct--if the spirit of man is in the image of
God, if God is the “Father of spirits,” it follows that man, with other
rich endowments, is blessed with an immortal nature, and Mr. Russell’s
position, that man is _all_ mortal is incorrect. This heaven-endowed
spirit is often spoken of in the Bible. When man was created, it is
said that God breathed into his body, and he became a “_living soul_.”
We are also told that he formeth the _spirit_ of man within him; (Zech.
xii. 1) that “the body without the _spirit_ is dead.” We read of “the
_spirits_ in prison;” Jesus on the cross gave up his _spirit_ to God,
committed his _spirit_ to God; when he appeared to his disciples they
thought they saw a _spirit_; but he told them that a _spirit_ hath
neither flesh nor bones. We are informed that the Sadducees believed
in neither angels nor _spirits_, but the Pharisees believed in both;
and when the latter heard the apostle Paul say, that the risen Christ
had appeared to him, they said, if a _spirit_ had appeared to him, they
ought not to fight against God.

From all this testimony, we learn that God is the Father of mankind,
and that consequently we partake of his nature--are created in his
image; and as God is a spirit, man is a spirit; as God is immortal, man
is immortal. Man’s _moral character_ may or may not be godlike, in the
divine image. The Christian only is said to be in God’s _moral_ image,
to be a partaker of the divine character; but it is the _nature_ of
man I speak of at this time, not his moral character. Children always
are of the _nature_ of their parents, but their _moral character_ may
be very different. So mankind, being the children of God, partake of
his divine nature, but their moral character may be ungodly. And it is
the purpose of heaven that man’s nature shall unfold till his moral
character shall be in harmony with the divine as his nature now is.
Corrupt as may be man’s moral character, he still retains the image
and glory of God his Father in his soul, but in various degrees of
distinctness. Some, by the great apostle, are compared to the sun,
others to the moon, and others still to the stars, (1 Cor. xv.) and we
are taught by the wise man that this divine glory will grow “brighter
and brighter to the perfect day.”

From Dayton I proceeded to Joliet, Ill., about one hundred and forty
miles distant. There had recently been heavy rains, and the bridges
on the Illinois’ rivers were nearly all swept away or much damaged,
and I had to swim my horse across the streams, or repair the broken
bridges to get my precious charge over the turbulent waters. We had
some dangerous passes through the streams, and over the frail bridges
I had repaired. In pulling the carriage over one bridge I came within
an hair’s breadth of being pushed into the creek, and the buggy falling
on me. The flood of this year was not quite equal to the flood of 1844,
spoken of in a previous chapter, but it probably did more damage,
as the country was more improved. When I reached Alton, some of its
streets were navigable for skiffs, and the levee at St. Louis was all
submerged. But after much hard traveling and toiling we made Joliet;
and from thence I went to St. Louis alone, leaving Mrs. Manford to
spend the summer with her sisters in Joliet and Lockport.

St. Louis at that time contained eighty thousand inhabitants, and was
rapidly increasing in population, in business, and in wealth. At the
present time it contains two hundred and ten thousand inhabitants--an
immense increase in fifteen years. It is built on the west bank of the
Mississippi river, eighteen miles below the junction of the Missouri
river with the “Father of Waters.” The ground on which this noble
city stands, is high and rolling, its streets are well paved, and the
buildings generally are of a substantial character, being mostly of
brick. Its beautiful site, its central location, its sixteen hundred
miles of river navigation, its railroads extended or being extended in
all directions, the vast agricultural region of which it is the center,
the immense mineral and coal fields at its door--these advantages all
combined must ultimately make St. Louis one of the largest cities of
the world.

Several spasmodic efforts had been made to establish a Universalist
society in St. Louis. J. Libbey, G. T. Flanders, N. M. Gaylord had
preached there, but for two or three years previous to my removal to
St. Louis all effort in that direction had been abandoned. I lectured
in the city occasionally; a society was organized, and the next year G.
S. Weaver from Ohio became pastor of the society.

I had moved to St. Louis to publish a paper there, and to travel and
preach in Missouri and in the neighboring states. An immense field
was before me, a vast amount of labor was to be performed, and I
went to work with a resolute heart. In all Southern Illinois we had
not a minister, a meeting-house, nor a society, and, of course, our
friends were few and unknown. It was the same in Missouri, with two
or three exceptions. There were a society and preacher just emerging
from Dunkardism, in the southern part of the state. In Troy we had a
meeting-house, but the society was dead. In the southwest part of the
state L. C. Marvin had labored some, but then he was not residing in
Missouri.

Leaving Mrs. Manford in charge of the paper, in September I commenced
a long and laborious journey through Missouri, among entire strangers,
expecting to be absent three months. Crossed the Mississippi river at
Alton, four miles above where the Missouri flows into it, to go to
Cottleville, thirty miles distant, where I had my first appointment.
The rain poured down in torrents nearly the whole day, and to add to
my troubles I got lost in the woods and swamps at the junction of the
two rivers. Regaining the road, I traveled till dark, and finding that
I could not reach Cottleville that night, made application at a dozen
houses for lodging, but all said, “No; we are full.” The night being
intensely dark, the rain falling fast, and the roads in a horrible
condition and unknown to me, I resolved to go no farther. Stopped at
a house, called the man thereof to the door, and solicited a resting
place till morning. “We have no room; they will keep you at the next
house.”

“What are you in this country?--heathens? At ten or fifteen places I
have been refused admittance, each telling your story, that I could
be accommodated at the next house. Whether you take me in or not, I
shall go no farther till morning. I am wet, and cold, and tired. It is
so dark I cannot see my horse, the road is nearly impassable, and I
am a stranger in the country; I know no one, and no one knows me. If
you will not shelter me in your house, I will sit under this tree till
morning, for I am determined to proceed no farther to-night.”

“Oh, well,” said he, “come in, come in; we will do the best we can for
you.”

Arrived at Cottleville the next morning, and spoke to the people in
the evening. The next day proceeded to Troy, and on the succeeding day
delivered three discourses. Found a respectable number of friends there
and in the vicinity, and obtained forty subscribers for the _Golden
Era_. As elsewhere remarked, N. Wadsworth resided and preached in Troy
a year or two previous to his death, and I found many who blessed his
memory for the beautiful truths he had taught them. Have frequently
spoken in this place since that first visit, and have some highly
esteemed friends there. Mrs. Manford often retreated to it from the
scorching sun of St. Louis.

Lectured in Prairieville, Louisville, and then proceeded to Ashley,
where I spoke several times. There were four brothers by the name of
Hendricks residing near this village--all elderly men, of considerable
wealth, and had long been citizens of the county. If the world were
composed of men of the sterling worth of those brothers, there should
be no need of “camp or court.” It has been my sad duty to perform the
funeral service for two of those brothers, and for the wife of one of
the survivors. “Blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord,” and the
living who make virtue their choice. Lectured in Bowling Green, and
then in Louisiana, a beautiful town on the Mississippi river. W. K.
Kennedy, a noble man, and ever my steadfast friend, resided in this
place. He served his country through the great rebellion, and soon
after he returned home was murdered, as is supposed, on the Mississippi
river.

Preached in Frankfort, and passed on to London. As soon as it became
known I was to lecture in London, a man went post haste to Hannibal,
nine miles distant, and brought out a preacher to reply. The moment
I was through he opened on me pell mell, without regard to sense
or syntax. He evidently believed it was thunder that killed, not
lightning. He knew nothing about the liberal faith, but thought he had
perfect knowledge of it. In noticing his noisy harangue, I cut him
right and left, and he very considerably “subsided.” Drove to Hannibal
and lectured four times. Have often preached in that place, and have
some dear friends there. The Browns, the Westfalls, and others, I shall
esteem as long as this heart beats. The latter have a charming home on
the bluff overlooking the Mississippi river, embowered in trees, vines
and shrubbery. All the fruits of this latitude grow to perfection and
in wonderful profusion on their grounds. There are the apple, pear,
cherry--the best varieties--plum, peach, grape, and berries of all
kinds. It is, especially, a delightful summer home, and Mrs. Manford
frequently fled to it from the melting sun of St. Louis.

A certain doctor of Hannibal published some very coarse and false
articles in a St. Louis paper about Universalism: and I replied to him
in such a manner that he armed himself to shoot me when I was in the
town to fulfill an appointment, but his friends kept him from me till
I had left, and he had cooled off. I knew nothing of the wrath of this
second Achilles till I returned to Hannibal a month after. I was not
blameless, but hardly merited being shot.

Lectured in Palmyra, in the Court-House full of men--one woman only
being present. A preacher said he had one or two questions to ask.

“State your questions and I will try to answer them.”

“Are you from the East?”

“I have the honor of being a son of old Massachusetts.”

“Are you an abolitionist?”

“Yes, sir; I believe in the abolition of the devil and all his works.”

“That is not what I mean. Are you a political abolitionist?”

“I think every wrong in politics should be abolished, and finally will
be.”

“But are you for abolishing slavery in Missouri, and the other Southern
states?”

“I believe negro slavery to be wrong in morals and in politics, and a
curse to the white man and the black man; but it is sustained by the
laws of the land, I do not expect to do anything unlawful against it.
But what is your object in questioning me in this public manner?”

“I wanted to know your sentiments.”

“You have them on slavery; and now I will give them concerning
yourself. My opinion of you is, that you are a very meddlesome and
officious fellow.”

Although, probably, nearly all present were intensely proslavery, for
Palmyra was always strong in that direction, they generally condemned
the preacher for his impertinence, and treated me kindly. I journeyed
to Tully and lectured several times. Had the following conversation
with a church member:

“You told us last evening, that the common theory of a judgment day, at
the end of time, was a delusion. The Scriptures certainly teach what
you were pleased to term a delusion.”

“Do you think that God judges in the earth?”

“I do. We are in his presence every moment of our earth-life, and he
judges between the good and the bad; the righteous are exalted, and
the wicked are debased. The Bible expressly says, ‘There is a God who
judgeth in the earth.’”

“Very good. You also contend, that at death we are sent to heaven or
hell. Of course this is not done till we are judged. Civil tribunals do
not hang a man and then judge him. He is judged first. The Divine Judge
surely does not consign any to hell without a previous judgment. I have
heard ministers of your faith at funerals tell the mourners, that the
departed have gone to the bar of God to give an account of the deeds
done in the body, and that justice will be meted out to them. Do you
believe that we go at death to the bar of God?”

“That is a solemn truth, and we should have that judgment in all our
thoughts from the cradle to the grave.”

“You think, I suppose, that there is to be a judgment day at the end of
the world.”

“I certainly do; and that is what I understood you to deny.”

“According to your theology God will judge the world three times. 1.
All are judged in this world, you assert. 2. All are judged at death.
3. All will be judged at the end of the world. Here are three distinct
judgments. I, on the other hand, contend, that God judges us but once,
and that will continue as long as we live. His law is stamped on the
soul, and our eternal life will only increase its impression, its
vividness, and by that immutable law, ingrained in the soul, we are now
judged, and ever will be judged. If our character is in harmony with
that law, peace, bliss, heaven is our portion. If we are disloyal to
that law, we are crushed on the iron track. And what is true now ever
will be true--obedience ever will lead to heaven, and disobedience to
hell. Instead of their being three judgments, there is only _one_; and
instead of three seasons of judgment, the true judgment is eternal. I
believe, then, in an everlasting and universal judgment.”

“I should like to hear a discourse on that kind of a judgment, for it
is a new idea to me.”

“I will deliver a discourse on that subject this evening.”

Traveled to Memphis, where I spoke six times. Delivered a discourse on
the occasion of the death of C. S. Webber, who had departed this life
about one year previous. He was from Ohio, and had labored in Missouri
two years. The good cause lost an active and efficient laborer in
his death. He was untiring in his efforts, and it was his delight to
proclaim the unsearchable riches of heaven. At a subsequent visit to
this place, a clergyman arose in the congregation, and propounded some
thirty or forty questions, which he had written for the occasion, and
desired me to answer them, which I did as I best could.

“You teach that punishment is designed to reform the sinner. What
evidence is there that you are correct?”

“Every sorrow, every pain, resulting from transgression, is a voice of
God telling the offender that he has done wrong, has violated a law of
the Creator, and is on the open road to ruin, and urges him to retrace
his steps. It is a thunder-clap from the Almighty, reverberating
through the soul and body of the transgressor, telling him of his
prodigality, warning him to flee from the wrath to come, and begging
him to return to truth and duty. Pain is as clearly and as certainly
the voice of God condemning vice, and urging the offender to abandon
the forbidden path, and walk in virtue’s ways, as any word ever spoken
by a living prophet. It is God speaking directly to man, face to face.

“Happiness also being the natural and sure result of virtue, is a
divine approbation of the christian life; it is the voice of God
sanctioning virtue and encouraging the good man in righteousness. And
this approbation of virtue, and condemnation of vice, is a revelation
to man in all climes and ages. It is older than the written Bible, and
is proclaimed to all the sons and daughters of earth, ‘Day unto day
uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge. There is no
speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.’ Ps. xix. 2, 3.

“True, it is often drowned in the clamor of passion, disregarded by the
ignorant, and unheeded by the thoughtless; but its testimony against
all wrong, and for all right, constantly sounding in the ears, and
being telegraphed through the soul and body of every human being, has
ever more or less curbed the passions of the vicious, and promoted
righteousness. Happiness is man’s end and aim. For that he toils from
the cradle to the grave; and he is assured from his own experience,
which is the revelation from God to man I have been speaking of, that
vice surely brings misery, and virtue surely brings happiness. This
fact in every one’s experience has every where lessened vice and
increased virtue, notwithstanding passion, ignorance, false philosophy,
and false religion--flesh and the devil--have blasphemously called it
delusion, irreligion, infidelity.”

“You remarked in your first discourse, that there is an analogy between
the earth and man. Is not that infidelity?”

“I can see no infidelity in it. It is best not to be afraid of
the truth. That there is a striking analogy between man’s physical
organism, and the earth of which it is a product, is certainly correct.
1. The rock of the earth corresponds to the bones in the human frame.
2. The dust covering the rocky skeleton of the earth corresponds to
the flesh spread over these bones. 3. The veins of water meandering
through the earth answer to the purple currents coursing every part
of the body. 4. The earth has internal fires, the body has internal
heat. 5. The hair of the head, which is a vegetable, corresponds to the
vegetable growth covering the earth. 6. The earth is even sometimes
_sick_, like man, and is only relieved by vomiting forth its feverish
contents. 7. The earth is surrounded by an atmosphere; philosophers
tell us, that every man is enveloped in an atmosphere, emenating from
his body. 8. The earth was once in a ruder condition than it is now;
man was once coarser, more brutal than he is at the present time. 9.
Man had a beginning--‘in the beginning God made the heavens and the
earth.’ 10. This mortal body must die, be decomposed, return to the
source whence it came; will not this earth die, be decomposed, and
return whence it came? The gentleman may call this infidelity if he
pleases. He can then finish the chapter of folly by calling summer,
winter; heat, cold; light, darkness; truth, error; virtue, vice; and
God, devil.”

A Presbyterian minister replied to one of my discourses, and after
answering his objections, I proceeded southward, and lectured in Sand
Hill, Milford, Edina and Newark. Subsequently I had an appointment to
debate four days with a man in Newark. He was to try to sustain this
proposition--“Universalism is no better than infidelity.” But it being
impossible for me to reach there at the appointed time, the discussion
did not take place, and I never could induce him afterwards to discuss
that proposition. I delivered a series of discourses in Newark soon
after this disappointment, and thus noticed the gentleman’s proposition:

Mr. Matlock, I understand, when he was here to debate with me, told
you in what respect “Universalism is no better than infidelity.”
Universalism, he made out, agrees in one or two points with infidelity,
therefore he wisely concluded that the whole system is no better than
infidelity. Let us see what Campbellism is according to this rule.
Mormonism says, there is a God, and that he will torment millions of
mankind eternally; Campbellism says the same, therefore Campbellism
is no better than Mormonism, and Mr. Matlock might as well go to Salt
Lake and marry a dozen of his Mormon sisters. Paganism says, there is a
burning hell for the wicked; Campbellism says there is a burning hell
for the wicked, therefore Campbellism is no better than Paganism, and
Mr. Matlock had better sacrifice his jackass to appease the wrath of
his offended God. Catholicism teaches, that the unbaptized will all be
lost; Campbellism teaches the same, therefore Campbellism is no better
than Catholicism, and Mr. Matlock had better join the “mother church,”
migrate to Rome, and sanctify himself by kissing the great toe of “his
holiness,” the pope. Atheism tells us, that man is mortal and must
die; Campbellism tells the same; Campbellism, then, is no better than
Atheism.

But no system can be farther from infidelity than Universalism. It
is all aglow with wisdom, justice, mercy, goodness, holiness, truth
and virtue. It teaches, that there is a God who rules in heaven and
on earth, that man is in his image, and in imitating him we derive
our chief good, and that we are destined to approximate his adorable
perfections forever and ever. A person must have a dark and deformed
mind, who can denounce that spiritual system, and brand it with
infidelity.

At another time in going from Newark to Edina, the rain poured down
in torrents till I was about half way through, when the wind suddenly
changing to the north, and the thermometer fell in one hour to four
degrees below zero. When I reached a haven I was encased in a thick
coat of ice, and could not get out of the saddle without assistance.
The next day I rode thirty miles over the prairie in the face of a
northwest wind, that cut like a razor.

From Newark I proceeded to Shelbyville, and spoke several times. Have
often lectured there since. Thence to Paris, Middle Grove, Columbia,
in all of which towns I had large congregations. Lectured in Fayette,
and then crossed the Missouri river, one hundred and sixty miles from
St. Louis, and preached in Booneville, a beautiful town on the bank of
“Big Muddy,” as the Missouri is often called. This is a mighty river.
Its waters, from hundreds of fountains in the Rocky Mountains, after
dashing through deep gorges, tumbling over vast precipices, and winding
over the immense deserts of the far west, all combine and make one of
the largest rivers in the world. Although it is here a wide, deep and
rapid stream, it is nearly two thousand miles to where it pours its
vast contents into the salt sea. The bluffs on each side of it, two or
three hundred feet high, are about seven miles apart, and show what
this river has been doing these many years. The clay and rock that once
filled that vast channel, seven miles wide, three hundred feet deep,
and thousands of miles long, has all been floated away in its ceaseless
and resistless tide--carried south, and helped to redeem Louisiana and
Mississippi from ocean’s dominions.

About the finest country in the world is bordering on this river in the
state of Missouri. On the north side of the river, from Iowa to where
it connects with the Mississippi river, and on the south side from
Nebraska, through Kansas to Jefferson City, Mo., the land is rolling,
well timbered, and the soil rich, warm and deep. Tobacco, hemp, the
cereals, the grasses, and the fruits of the temperate climate, grow
here abundantly, and as near perfection as in any country. Mighty
cities will be built on the banks of this great river, a dense
population will throng its shores, and civilization will here attain
its highest degree of glory.

Journeyed to Georgetown, and lectured several times; a man replied,
I rejoined, when he said no more. Proceeded to Calhoun and preached
twice; thence to Clinton where I spoke three times. This was the limits
of my journey south. I was in the southwest part of Missouri. The
country was thinly settled, and the adherents of the liberal faith were
very scarce. L. C. Marvin had resided in Booneville, and preached some
in this region, but there was no organization, and little was known of
our faith. Still my congregations were large, and the people listened
respectfully. This is an excellent field for a missionary. It is a
beautiful country, and will soon be densely settled.

Traveled east to Warsaw, on the Osage river, and delivered my message.
One preacher replied, and another asked many questions, so I had about
as much as I could attend to. The latter inquired, if we organize
churches, build meeting-houses, and ordain ministers; and was much
surprised when informed of the number of our churches, meeting-houses
and ministers. “Do you profess to be Christians?” said he. When I
replied, yea, he added, “Well, I did not know that.”

Proceeded to Jefferson City; reached there about dark, wet and cold,
for it had rained all day. Stopped at a hotel, and inquired if there
was an appointment for me; the landlord thought there was at the
Court-house. Hastened to the place without supper, as I had no time to
attend to that, and found the Court-house lighted, and seven or eight
very respectable appearing men in the large room. No more came, and
I delivered a long discourse to that small crowd. When I was through,
I mentioned the paper I was publishing in St. Louis, and every man
present subscribed for it; and I found that they were some of the
notables of the state--the lieutenant-governor, secretary of state,
treasurer of state, auditor of state, post-master of the town, and two
lawyers.

The next day crossed the Missouri river to its north side, and rode
to Fulton, where I lectured, and then proceeded to Danville. Here I
meet with opposition. When I had taken my seat in the Court-house, a
man arose in the congregation, and wished me to take for my text, the
parable of the rich man and Lazarus. I spoke one hour on that subject,
although I had rode all day on horseback. As soon as I was through
with my discourse on that text, another wanted an explanation of the
“lake of fire” and “second death.” I accommodated him, when a third
one replied to what I had said on both passages. I spoke another hour,
and was glad to have some rest. Rode next day to Warrenton, thirty
miles, and lectured, and by request, told the people all I knew about
the _devil_. One man in the house seemed to think I had not done that
character justice, and so he added what I omitted with reference to his
being, history, works, character and future prospects. He made him out
to be a very powerful being, more than a match for the Almighty, and
the author of all the sin and woe of this world. I asked the preacher,
whence the devil derived all his power to do so much mischief, and he
would not condescend to inform me. I asked him why God did not kill the
devil if he was such an enemy to him, and he said that was an infidel
question.

I told the people I had not a particle of faith in the devil of the
Methodist creed, for the gentleman was of that order. It represents him
as a god--the god of hell--and the good book does not require faith
in such a god. But there are devils many, that have a real existence.
Every evil thought, purpose, passion; every error we cherish, and every
wicked act we do, is a devil, for each and all of them are enemies to
our peace, happiness and prosperity. Instead of preaching devils, let
us go to work and kill those first in our own heart, and then aid our
neighbors in exterminating those in their hearts. This would be dealing
with devils to a good purpose.

After riding two more days I reached home. Had been absent three
months, delivered eighty-four discourses, and rode about eight hundred
miles. I was well pleased with my journey, for I had made many
acquaintances, obtained a large number of subscribers for the paper,
and had accomplished, I thought, some good. Mrs. Manford issued the
October and November numbers of the paper in my absence.




CHAPTER XV.


  THE GOLDEN ERA ISSUED SEMI-MONTHLY--THE MISSOURIANS--SLAVE
  HOLDERS--TRAVEL IN SOUTHERN MISSOURI--IF ENDLESS WOE IS TRUE ALL
  NATURE WOULD WEEP--REGION OF IRON--DUNKARDS IN MILLERSVILLE--IN
  SOUTHERN ILLINOIS--PHILOSOPHY OF CHRIST BEING THE SAVIOR OF THE
  WORLD--REFUSE TO DEBATE--DISCUSSION IN CARLYLE--INSPIRATION--OUR
  NAME--PARTIALISM APPROACHES INFIDELITY--THREE DOWNWARD STEPS--REPLY
  TO A SERMON--HAYNE’S SERMON--MR. LEWIS DEBATING ON HIS KNEES--WRITTEN
  DISCUSSIONS WITH TWO METHODIST MINISTERS--IN NORTHERN MISSOURI--A
  PREACHER REPLIES--A LOG CABIN--TALK WITH A SLAVE--THOMAS
  ABBOTT--NEGROES HUNG--THE GOLDEN ERA--MRS. MANFORD LECTURING--LET
  WOMAN WORK--A CIRCUIT IN MISSOURI--TRAVELING IN COLD WEATHER--DEBATE
  IN QUINCY.

When the second volume of the _Golden Era_ was commenced, it was issued
semi-monthly, and changed to a quarto form. Its circulation rapidly
increased, but I found it rather hard to pay expenses, for St. Louis
was, and still is, a very dear place in which to live or do business.
Labor, rent, paper, commanded high prices, and living expenses were
about double they were in Indianapolis. If the people with whom I
labored had not liberally compensated me, I could not have kept
square with the world. But I found the Missourians to be hospitable,
generous and liberal; and I shall ever remember with gratitude the many
kindnesses I have received from their hands. I differed from many of
them concerning slavery, and they knew it; but I am not conscious of
any ill treatment from any one on that account. We often canvassed our
differences, but in the kindest spirit on both sides, and some of my
best friends were extensive slave holders. Many good people suppose
that every slave holder was a semi-savage; but that is a great mistake.
Some of the best men and women I was ever acquainted with owned
slaves. They thought slavery was the normal condition of the black man,
that God made him for servitude to the white man. They were educated
to regard slavery in this light. Their churches, their pastors, their
school teachers, so taught them. Slavery, then, was not wrong, but
according to the laws of God. Those who know any thing of man well know
that the most moral, most Christian people, may cherish intellectual
errors without being morally corrupted. But slavery is now dead, and I
have met but few in Missouri who are not glad of it. Although in their
estimation, slavery was right enough, it was unprofitable, perplexing,
and the bone of contention in the nation, and they are glad the cause
of so much strife is no more. If slavery could be restored in Missouri
to-day by the vote of the people, not one in twenty would vote--restore
it.

During the second year I was in St. Louis, I traveled through Southern
Missouri, Southern Illinois, and into the south part of Indiana. This
journey occupied six weeks. Lectured in Potosi, forty miles south of
St. Louis. A clergyman replied in a very bitter tone. I had spoken of
the terrible doctrine of endless woe, and remarked, that if it was a
fact in God’s universe, it seemed to me, that all nature would utter
cries of woe. He was offended at the remark. I repeated, that if nine
tenths of the inhabitants of God’s universe are to howl eternally in
hell, nature, being all alive with goodness, would utter cries of woe.

  “The woods would begin and tell it to the doleful winds;
   And doleful winds, wail to the howling hills;
   And howling hills, mourn to the dismal vales;
   And dismal vales, sigh to the sorrowing brooks;
   And sorrowing brooks, weep to the weeping streams;
   And weeping streams, awake the groaning deep.
   The heavens, great archway of the universe,
   Would put sackcloth on; and Ocean, clothe herself
   In garb of widowhood, and gather all
   Her waves into a groan, and utter it,
   _Long, loud, deep, piercing, dolorous, immense_.”

But instead of this universal wailing of woe, all nature is praising
God for his goodness to the children of men. Oh, what mockery all
this would be, if cries of agony, and wails of despair are to ascend
forever! I cannot subscribe to such a creed if I would, and would not
if I could.

Journeyed to Iron Mountain, and lectured once. Here is the far famed
Iron Mountain, three hundred and twenty-eight feet high, and at its
base covers an area of five hundred acres. How far downward the ore
extends is not known, but an artisan well, one hundred and fifty feet
deep, at the base of the hill, does not reach the limits of the iron.
Its average yield in the furnace is fifty-six per cent. Near the
surface the ore is found in pebbles or lumps, varying in size. Below,
it becomes more compact and massive.

Six miles south, are other deposits of iron ore, not less rich, and,
in all probability, not less extensive. One of these is Pilot Knob,
five hundred and eighty-one feet high, with a base of three hundred and
sixty acres. Sixty per cent. of this ore is iron. One mile from Pilot
Knob is Shepherd Mountain, six hundred and sixty feet high, and covers
eight hundred acres. This hill is penetrated with veins or dykes of
iron ore, running in different directions. The ores obtained therefrom,
are the magnetic, the specular, and a mixture of the two. The iron
yield at the furnace is about the same as that of the other hills.
There are known to be other very valuable deposits of iron ore in this
vicinity, besides those I have named; and likely there are others not
yet discovered, in the adjacent hills. There are also rich deposits
of lead and zinc in different localities in Southern Missouri. Vast
deposits of coal are likewise found in nearly all parts of the state.
The truth is, Missouri, in mineral wealth, exceeds any other state in
the Union; and the day will surely come when her immense resources will
be developed.

Passed on to Millersville, where I found a large settlement of
Dunkards, who had gradually emerged into Universalism. Soon after my
visit they dissolved their connection with that sect. They migrated
from North Carolina to that section while it belonged to Spain. A
brother by the name of Hendricks preached with them till he died; then
another brother of the settlement, J. H. Miller, was set apart for the
ministry, and he dying a year since, --. Miller occupies his place as
teacher. They do not go abroad for ministers, but select one of their
number for the ministerial office, and he officiates till he is called
home, and then another is chosen from the community as his successor.
This, probably, was the apostolic method; and these excellent people,
in christian virtues, and in simplicity of manners, come as near the
original Christians as any since the first century of the Dispensation
of Grace. When the rebellion raged in the land, to a man and woman,
they were true to their country; and being in a very exposed position,
they suffered sorely. I was in the neighborhood several times during
the war; and at one time some rebels threatened to hang me, but they
were told that if an hair of my head was hurt, an hundred men would
instantly shoulder their muskets, and rid the settlement of rebels
forever.

Crossed the Mississippi river at Cape Girardeau, one hundred and fifty
miles below St. Louis, and traveled through the southern portion of
Illinois to Mt. Vernon, Ind., on the Ohio river. Was one week between
those points, and lectured ten times. Found but few who knew anything
about the doctrines of the Restitution, and could not learn that a
discourse had ever been before delivered in all that region in their
defense. Of course the prejudices of the people were strong against
me, but large numbers attended my meetings, and I was kindly treated.
Robert Dale Owen attended one of them, and expressed himself favorably.

At Elizabethtown a lawyer wished to know the _philosophy_ of Christ
being the Savior of the world. I replied thus: Jesus Christ was a man,
a mere man, nothing but a man. But what is a MAN? He is the last, the
best, the crowning work of God--the ultimate of the universe, made
in the “_image_ and _glory_ of _God_.” Jesus is called in the Bible,
“_The man_, Christ Jesus.” He was _the man_ of men, a _perfect_ man,
fully developed in all his spiritual faculties--_head_ and _shoulders_
above his brothers. Go into a corn-field, and you will find one ear
larger than any other ear; it is only though an ear of corn. Go to the
forest, and you will find one tree larger than any other tree; it is
only though a tree. So, Christ was a man, but he was the largest man,
spiritually, that ever lived; and that _fact_ makes him our teacher,
our savior. He cannot be otherwise. We cannot teach him; he must teach
us. He is our heaven-appointed teacher, and all he said, and all he
did, is the natural result of his spiritual pre-eminence. If this is
correct his divine mission is based in nature, is based on the throne
of God, and the gates of hell can never prevail against it. He will
continue his work till all are taught, all are enlightened, all are
saved. Greece and Rome had their wise men; but who of the best of
them taught and lived as Jesus did? “Thou shall,” said he, “love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul and strength, and thy neighbor
as thyself; bless and curse not; return good for evil; do by others
as you would have others do by you.” He not only taught this with his
lips, but his works, his character, his soul, his life, were in perfect
harmony with such wisdom. He was godlike, thought God’s thoughts,
spoke God’s words, and did God’s works. Heaven and earth will ever
proclaim him--“the Savior of mankind.”

Delivered several discourses in Mt. Vernon, a pleasant town on the
Ohio river, and then proceeded to Evansville, where I also lectured. A
preacher here replied in a very abusive manner, and I paid but little
attention to him. This offended the gentleman, and he dared me to a
discussion. I refused to have anything to do with him, as Christ had
said, “Cast not your pearl before swine.”

Returned to St. Louis through Booneville, Vincennes, Lawrenceville,
Olney, Salem, Carlyle, and lectured in all those places.

About this time I had a discussion in Carlyle, Ill., with Mr. Stafford,
a Presbyterian clergyman. We were to continue the discussion four days,
but he brought it to a close at the end of the second day by going
home, as he said, to find a _calf_ that had jumped out of the lot.
Whether he found the calf I cannot say, as he did not return to report
his success. He knew nothing of the liberal faith, save what he had
learned from its enemies, and was poorly prepared to meet the arguments
in its favor.

He charged our people with denying the Bible, and I replied, We do not
deny the Bible. We believe it contains a record of God’s revelation
to man. We do not say that every book, chapter, verse and letter,
from Genesis to Revelation, is inspiration. The Bible makes no such
pretention. Considerable part of the Old and New Testaments is
_historical_; and intelligent and well informed men, can write history
correctly without inspiration, especially if they are eye-witnesses of
what they relate. Jesus Christ, “the author and finisher of our faith,”
was guided and illuminated by the Holy Spirit. His soul was in perfect
harmony with the Great Soul of the universe, hence he said, “I and
my Father are one.” “He who hath seen the Son hath seen the Father
also;” hence, truth, from the Fountain of truth, flowed into his soul
as naturally as water flows into a sponge; hence to do his Father’s
will was his meat and drink; hence the wisdom he uttered was the wisdom
of God. He is then the Way, the Truth, and the Life; the Teacher and
Savior of man. He is a medium through which God speaks to, and blesses
the world. Moses, the prophets, and the apostles, were also divinely
illuminated, but not in the same _degree_ Jesus was, for he was blessed
with the spirit “without measure.” Jesus is the central figure among
those anointed men. He was “in the form of God,” and in the “express
image of his person,” by nature and by character. He is a sun, but they
are stars. You may call this denying the Bible, if you please, but I am
sure this affirms the Bible.

He found fault with our name--Universalist--said it was not scriptural.
I remarked, It is admitted the word is not in the Bible; but the
idea often occurs in that book. 1. God is the universal Father
of mankind--“have we not all one Father?” 2. He is a universal
Savior--“the Savior of all men.” 3. Jesus is a universal Savior--“the
Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world.” 4. God’s will is
for universal salvation--“who will have all men to be saved.” 5. God’s
grace brings universal salvation--“for the grace of God which bringeth
salvation to all men.” 6. There will be a universal ingathering into
Christ--“gather together all things in Christ.” 7. There is to be a
universal deliverance from earthly corruption--“the creation shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty
of the children of God.” 8. Universal righteousness will finally
prevail--“by the obedience of one shall many--the mass--be made
righteous.” 9. Universal reconciliation shall finally be effected--“God
is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself.” 10. There shall
ultimately come a period of universal praise to God, and confession to
God’s glory. (Phil. ii; Rev. v. 11). There will be a universal blessing
of the nations, families and kindred--“all nations, families and
kindred of the earth shall be blessed.” 12. There is to be a universal
resurrection to a heavenly condition--“in Christ shall all be made
alive.”

There is propriety, then, in the name. The Arminians were once called
Universalists, because they believed in a universal atonement. We
believe in a universal atonement, and in the universal _efficacy_ of
that atonement. In Europe, very learned men, men who master all the
sciences, are called Universalists. It is an honorable name, then, a
learned name, an appropriate name for those who recognize God as a
universal Father and Savior, Christ as a universal Redeemer, and who
rejoice in the hope of the universal destruction of sin, suffering and
death, and the universal reign of truth, virtue, life and salvation.
Universal means catholic. Our church, then, is the true Catholic
Church--all of Adam’s race will finally be members of it, and partake
of its blessings. What is called the Catholic Church is a very partial
church. Notwithstanding the propriety of our name, I seldom use it--it
sounds a little too sectarian for my taste. Some of my brethren are so
in love with it, they hitch it to almost every thing. That may be all
right; but I am not so deeply in love with the name as some seem to
be. I had rather be called a godly man than a Universalist, whether I
deserve the appellation or not; and I had rather hear my church called
“the church of God,” than a Universalist church.

Returning to St. Louis, I lectured in Lebanon, and a man said the
sentiments I advocated lead through Deism to Atheism. How is that? I
replied. I am with the New Testament in believing in a God for ALL, and
a Savior for ALL. Is there any Deism or Atheism in that? Orthodoxy is
the first step downward, for it teaches a God for ALL, but a Savior
for PART. It makes the first departure from the gospel. Deism is
another step in the same direction, for it says a God for _all_, but a
Savior for NONE. Atheism is at the foot of the ladder, for it proclaims
a God for NONE, a Savior for NONE. There are, then, three downward
steps from Christianity or Universalism, to Atheism--ALL--PART--NONE.
Orthodoxy is the half-way house between Universalism and Infidelity.

Being requested to visit Florence, up the Illinois river about one
hundred miles, to hear a discourse against Universal Salvation, and
to reply if it was proper, I arrived by packet on Sunday at eleven
o’clock, soon after the preacher had commenced his sermon. He spoke
_three hours_, and made out, he supposed, a pretty strong case. After
one hour’s intermission, I replied to the discourse, which also
occupied three hours. The preacher, and his congregation, heard me
through; and at candle lighting of the same day, I delivered another
discourse in the same place. In my answer to the gentleman’s discourse
I offered twenty-five objections to endless misery, and twenty-five
objections to his view of a great judgment day; gave twenty-five
proofs and arguments, that virtue and vice are rewarded in this world;
furnished twenty-five reasons from Scripture for believing in the final
salvation of mankind.

A few days after this, I lectured in Naples, Ill., and while the
congregation were singing the second hymn, a Methodist preacher passed
me a tract, which I had seen before. Many years ago, immediately after
Hosea Ballou had delivered a discourse in some town in Vermont, Samuel
Haynes, a Congregationalist clergyman, a gentleman of color, and pastor
of a white congregation, and of considerable education, ability, and
much wit, arose and preached a sermon from the words of the serpent
to mother Eve, “Ye shall not surely die.” The thing was afterwards
published and scattered far and near. The tract the preacher gave
me was Haynes’ sermon. The serpent is represented as a Universalist
preacher, and his words, “Ye shall not surely die,” as the essence of
Universalism. Being in a humor for it, I took parson Haynes’ text for
my text that evening, followed his arrangement, adopted some of his
language, and put the “boot on the right foot,” I spoke as follows:

The Holy Scriptures are a peculiar fund of instruction. They inform
us of the origin of creation; of the primitive state of man--his
ignorance, folly and degradation. It appears that he was placed in
the garden of Eden, with full liberty to regale himself with all
the delicious fruits that were to be found, except what grew on one
tree; if he ate of that _he should_ SURELY _die on the_ DAY _of
transgression_, (Gen. ii. 17,) was the declaration of the Almighty.
Mark the language--he was not to be punished in the _next world_, but
in _this world_, and on the _day_, at the very _time_ he sinned. Let
this be remembered, for it is God’s truth.

Happy were the human pair amid this delightful paradise, until a
certain preacher endeavored to convince them that they could sin
without suffering IMMEDIATE punishment, without being punished on the
DAY of transgression.

We may attend to the _character_ of the preacher; to the _doctrine_
inculcated; to the _hearers_ addressed; to the _mediums_ or
_instruments_ of the preaching.

I. As to the PREACHER, I would observe, he is said by the Bible, to be
the lust of the flesh. “Let no one say when he is tempted, I am tempted
of God, but man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own _lust_
and enticed.” James i. 13, 14. He is also called the _carnal_ mind,
and that is ever at _enmity_ against God. Read the seventh and eighth
chapters of Romans carefully. In Genesis, lust--the carnal mind--is
personified and called a serpent, and in other parts of the Bible
termed satan, devil and adversary, for those terms mean a deceiver, an
opposer, and that is the character of the tempter in the human breast.
This was the tempter that led the first pair astray.

But to be a little more particular, let it be observed,

1. He is an _old_ preacher. He lived about one thousand seven hundred
years before Abraham--about two thousand four hundred and thirty years
before Moses--four thousand and four years before Christ. It is now
five thousand eight hundred and fifty-four years since he commenced
preaching. By this time he must have acquired great skill in the art.

2. He is a very _cunning_, artful preacher. The serpent, his prototype,
is said to possess much wisdom and cunning. When Elymus, the sorcerer,
came to turn away people from the faith, he is said to be _full of all
subtlety_, not only because he was an enemy of all righteousness, but
on account of his cunning and craftiness. He manifests his cunning
by preaching to the world, that they shall not surely be punished on
the DAY of transgression. That is a very pleasing doctrine to the
wicked. They love to be told that the time of retribution is FAR IN THE
DISTANCE, especially as that future punishment can all be escaped by
taking the benefit of a spiritual bankruptcy, any hour before they die.
Yes, he is a cunning preacher.

3. He is a very _laborious_, unwearied preacher. He has been in the
ministry almost six thousand years, and yet his zeal is not in the
least abated. The apostle Peter compares him to a roaring lion, roaming
about seeking whom he may devour. He is far from being circumscribed
within the narrow limits of parish, state or continental lines; but his
haunts and travels are very large and extensive. Wherever the doctrine
prevails that the wicked are not punished WHEN and WHERE they sin, the
tempter is preaching the same sermon he preached to mother Eve.

4. He is a _heterogeneous_ preacher, if I may so express myself.
He mixes truth with error, in order to make it go well, or to carry
his point. Nobody would bite at his hook if there was no truth on
it. He quotes fluently from the Bible, but then we must receive his
_interpretation_. If we dissent from it, all hell is in an uproar, and
we must be kicked out of his church, and out of the world, if possible.
Thousands have been burned at the stake, because they would not receive
his interpretation of the Bible. He admits we have reason, but then it
is _carnal_ and not to be trusted; we must believe without the reason
why. He admits there is one God, but there are three persons in the
Godhead; that is, one makes three, and three one. Christ is the Son of
God, and at the same time the Father; God is infinite in wisdom, power
and goodness, but Christ came to reconcile him to us; God _wishes_ to
save all mankind but _cannot_; God _can_ save all mankind, but _wishes_
to damn some to glorify his justice; God’s _justice_ requires the
endless damnation of all men, but his mercy pleads for the salvation
of all, and yet God’s attributes all harmonize. Men are born _totally
depraved_, and utterly incapable of doing anything acceptable to God,
yet it is the duty of men to repent and turn to God; Christ has made an
atonement for the sins of the whole world, but half of the world will
be damned eternally for their sins; God is a universal Father, God is
love, and yet will mock and laugh at the eternal groans and pains of
his children; heaven is the perfection of love, but the saints will
shout glory, when they see their fathers, and mothers, and children,
damned. Yes, he preaches truth as well as error.

5. He is a very _presumptuous_ preacher. Notwithstanding God had
declared on one occasion, in the most plain and positive manner, “On
the DAY thou eatest thereof, shall thou surely die,” yet this audacious
wretch had the impudence to confront Omnipotence, and say, “ye shall
not surely die”--on the DAY of transgression--and he is still
repeating the old sermon through the length and breadth of the land.

6. He is a very _successful_ preacher. He draws a great number after
him. No preacher can command hearers like him. He was successful with
our first parents--with the old world. Noah once preached to the world
that the judgments of heaven would _shortly_ come on wicked men,
but the tempter repeated his old sermon, and he made more converts
than Noah did. So it was with the cities of the plains. Lot preached
to them; the substance of which was, “Up, get out of this _place_:
for the Lord will destroy this _city_.” Gen. xix. 14. But the old
declaimer told them, no danger, no danger; God will not punish men in
_this world_, and therefore will not destroy this city, to which they
generally gave heed, and Lot seemed as one who mocked. They believed
the Orthodox preacher and were consumed. The father of lies is a very
successful preacher. He not only made converts of Adam and Eve, the
Antediluvians and Sodomites, but he has proselyted most of the world.
Nearly all mankind contend that God’s judgments are not in the earth.
Dr. Franklin was about right when he said a lie would travel all over
the country, while truth was putting on his boots.

II. Let us attend still more to the DOCTRINE inculcated by this
preacher. Ye shall not surely die on the day of transgression. Bold
assertion, without a single argument to support it. The death contained
in the threatening was, doubtless, _moral_ death. They did die to
their former innocence, to the sweet communion which they had before
enjoyed with the Father, to all the enjoyments of their beautiful
garden of fruits and flowers. The Bible says, “To be carnally minded
is _death_;” it is termed a “death in trespasses and sins;” “The wages
of sin is death;” “You hath he quickened who _were dead_;” “We know we
have passed _from death_ unto life.” This is the death threatened, and
the Almighty assured Adam that he would suffer it on the VERY DAY he
sinned. But the preacher said, No, all is false, there is no punishment
in this world, no hell, the wages of sin is not death.

III. We will now take notice of the hearers addressed by this preacher.
This we have in the context. And the serpent said unto the woman, “Ye
shall not surely die.” That Eve had not so much experience as Adam, is
evident; and so she was not equally able to withstand temptation. This
was doubtless the reason why the tempter chose her, with whom he might
hope to be successful. Probably he took the time when she was separated
from her husband.

That this preacher has always had the greatest success in the dark
and ignorant parts of the earth, is evident; his kingdom is a kingdom
of darkness. He is a great enemy of light. He will not permit his
disciples to hear a religious or philosophical discourse, read a
religious or philosophical book or paper, that contradicts his
creed--they must be like the old knight, read only one side of the
guide-board, and if they happen to get an idea the old creed don’t
sanction, they are called heretics. They may think, but not out of a
given circle; they may reason, provided they reason as the preacher
does. And the consequence is, that where the people think, reason
and read _least_, Orthodoxy has its truest adherents, and where the
people think, reason and read _most_, the doctrine of Holy Writ is most
prevalent, “Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth,
much more the wicked and sinner.” Prov. xi. 31.

IV. The instruments or mediums made use of by the preacher, will now be
considered. Every person, creed and institution, that propagates the
doctrine that men shall not surely die on the _day of transgression_,
is an instrument of the father of lies.

1. Calvinism, Arminianism, Mormonism, Catholicism, Mahommedanism and
Heathenism, tell us that this world is not one of retribution, that
God does not here reward virtue or punish vice. They unite in teaching
that this life is a state of probation, of trial, and of course no one
is punished till his probation ends, his trial is closed. This is the
deceiver’s first sermon gone to seed.

2. The preachers of all these isms are also his instruments. They are
faithful to their father’s cause, and he is much attached to them. If
one opposes their creed, some of them will at once exhibit the spirit
of the devil.

3. The earth is deluged with books, pamphlets and papers, teaching that
men shall not be punished on the day of transgression.


INFERENCES.

1. That the devil is not dead, but still lives, and is able to preach
as well as ever, Ye shall not die on the day of transgression.

2. Orthodoxy is no new fangled scheme, but can boast of great antiquity.

3. See a reason why it ought to be rejected because it is an ancient
devilish doctrine.

4. See a reason why satan is such a mortal enemy to the promises of the
Bible, for it says, “Christ came to destroy the devil.” Heb. ii. “Will
make an end of sin.” Dan. ix. “Behold the Lamb that taketh away the sin
of the world.” “He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but for the sins of the world.”

5. He hates the gospel, because it is “good news, glad tidings”--is
the “glorious gospel of the blessed God”--“gospel of the grace of
God”--“gospel of our salvation”--“gospel of peace.”

6. He hates the true Christ, because he will save the world from
sin, error, and death. “We have seen and do testify that this is the
Christ the SAVIOR of the WORLD.” When the world shall be saved, satan’s
occupation will be gone.

7. See whence it was that satan exerted himself so much to convince
our first parents there was no punishment in this world, because the
denunciation of the Almighty was true, and he was afraid that Adam and
Eve would continue in the belief of it, and so not believe in endless
punishment in eternity--his favorite doctrine. If there was no proof of
present punishment, satan would not be so busy in trying to convince
men that there was none.

8. We infer that ministers should not be proud of their preaching. If
they preach the true gospel, they only in substance preach Christ’s
sermons. If they preach, “Ye shall not surely die on the day of
transgression,” they only make use of the devil’s old notes that he
delivered about six thousand years ago.

9. It is probable that Orthodoxy will still prevail, since this
preacher is still alive, and not in the least superannuated; and every
effort against him only enrages him more and more, and excites him to
new inventions and exertions to build up his cause.

To close the subject. As the author of this discourse has spoken of
the character of satan, he trusts no one will feel himself personally
injured by this short sermon. But should any imbibe a degree of
friendship for this aged deceiver, and think that I have not treated
this Orthodox preacher with that respect and veneration he justly
deserves, let them be so kind as to point it out, and I will most
cheerfully retract; for it has ever been a maxim with me, “RENDER UNTO
ALL THEIR DUE.”

This was too much for the three preachers present so they left in a
hurry, when I reached the “inferences.” As they were marching out, I
remarked, “The wicked flee when no man pursueth.” They intended an
insult by throwing that tract in my face; but the new dress in which I
returned their tract kindled their wrath; and leaving the house as they
did, was an acknowledgment, that they were defeated. The congregation
fully appreciated the “situation,” and two or three zealous hearers
clapped their hands as the preachers were departing.

Mr. Lewis, with whom I debated in Springfield, sent me word, that if
I should visit Jerseyville, Ill., his church would be at my service.
Accordingly, I made an appointment in that place, and Mr. Lewis took
a seat with me in the desk. I told him I was perfectly willing he
should make any strictures on my discourse he might see proper. “Oh,
no,” said he, “I have invited you into my pulpit, and it would not
be proper for me to reply to your discourse.” In my sermon, I said
nothing about other creeds, but presented my own faith in as clear a
light as possible. Mr. Lewis, at my request, made the closing prayer,
and such a prayer was never before or since heard, I think. He took
up my discourse, item by item, systematically, and replied to it. He
would first tell the Lord what the speaker had said on a given point,
and then say, “O Lord, thou knowest that is not true, for by the mouth
of the prophet Isaiah, thou said”--and then he would quote from the
Bible. Having argued that point to his satisfaction, he would take
up another subject; and so on till he got through with my discourse.
Having finished his reply, I told the congregation I did not like that
way of debating; but he said, “I would as soon debate on my _knees_ as
on my feet.” Before I left town, we made arrangements for a written
discussion in the _Golden Era_. He was to write twelve letters; but,
having written six of them he sickened and died. I called on him during
his sickness, at Jacksonville, and he said, “Brother Manford, if I do
not go to heaven this time, I will not work as hard as I have done. I
have broken myself down by hard work--by trying to save souls.”

Soon after this, a Methodist clergyman of Indiana, by the name of
Mahan, proposed having a written discussion in the _Golden Era_.
He agreed to write twelve letters; but six or seven exhausted his
resources. Subsequently, he tried his hand at discussion with B. F.
Foster, in the _Herald_, and was handsomely defeated.

I made a long journey through Northern Missouri into Iowa; thence to
St. Joseph; then down to Western, Kansas City, Independence, Lexington,
Booneville, back to St. Louis. Traveled twelve hundred miles, all
on horseback, and lectured most every day. In most of the towns and
villages on this route I had no references, and generally wrote to the
postmasters to make appointments. The principles of the liberal faith
were entirely new to most of the people, and as notices of my meetings
were published pretty extensively, large numbers attended, some going
ten, twenty, and thirty miles. I had much controversy in public, and
many conversations in private, concerning the new doctrines. Found some
who received them with glad hearts, and many others who were disposed
to investigate before they condemned. Received but little compensation
for my labor and time, but obtained many subscribers for the paper.

Have room for only a few of the incidents of this journey. In
Kirksville, a minister asked many questions, and finally came to the
sage conclusion, that reason was carnal, that I was an emissary of
the devil, and that he would say no more to me; but gave notice, that
he should reply to my discourse the next Sunday. In Greentop, found a
settlement of believers from Tennessee. They were excellent people;
often visited them in subsequent years; but the war dispersed them,
and I understand, they are scattered over the plains of Nebraska.
Kirksville, near by, was one of the battle-fields of the rebellion;
rebel Porter’s forces were there routed and ruined, and the town was
much injured. Colonel Linder, one of my friends, was an active man in
the Union cause. I traveled on what was called the “Mormon Trace,”--a
road from Nauvoo to St. Joseph, the route the Mormons journeyed when
they went from Nauvoo to Salt Lake. It was generally through a wild
region, but the face of the country was rolling and pleasant. About
sundown one day, I rode up to a cabin and inquired the distance to the
next house.

“Ten miles.”

“Will you keep me to-night?”

“I reckon so; the old woman is powerful sick; I have a heap of ailments
in my cabin.”

“Are there any settlements up the creek?”

“Oh, yes; right smart sprinkling.”

There were fifteen men and women belonging to the house, and how we
were all to be disposed of that night, was rather a puzzler to me,
as there were only two rooms in the cabin; but there was really no
difficulty on that score. The principal room answered four valuable
purposes, although it was not more than twenty feet square--it was a
kitchen, dining-room, sitting-room, and bed-room. True, there were
only two bedsteads in it, but when bed time arrived, the floor was
covered with blankets, which afforded ample sleeping accommodations.
I was conducted into the “parlor bed-room,” which was entirely void
of all “modern improvements.” It was made of round logs, without any
weather-boarding, plastering, ceiling, or “chinking;” the stars could
be seen through its sides and roof, while its floor was clay, covered
about six inches deep with water. In one corner of the pen some stakes
were driven into the mud, rails fastened to them, on which a straw bed
was laid, with a blanket or two. That was my bed; no, not _mine_, but
_our_ bed; for soon a big fellow stretched himself on one side of me,
and he was followed by another, who laid about six feet of flesh and
bone across the foot of the bed. I was tired, and slept first-rate all
night, and crawled out of the den in the morning much refreshed.

Mine host said he had been on the frontier all his life; did not
own the land he occupied--was a squatter--and wanted to sell his
“improvements,” to go farther west, where he could hunt bear and
buffalo. He said he was a Baptist; and when I told him of my faith, he
declared he did not want to go to heaven if all sinners are to go there.

“But no sinners will go there; they will be regenerated.”

“Don’t tell me that; the reprobates will not be regenerated; their doom
is sealed. I have grace in my soul, and know I am right.”

When I offered to pay him for keeping me, he replied, “You are welcome;
the fare was hard, but if you come this way again, give me a call.”

A day or two after this, I rode with a negro a few hours. He was
returning from visiting his wife and children.

“Why do you not live with your family?”

“Master won’t sell me to my wife’s master, so I live twenty miles from
her.”

“How often do you see her?”

“’Bout once a month.”

“Did you ever have another wife?”

“Yes; but her master died, and she was taken south, and the children.”

“Have you heard since of her, and the children?”

“No; don’t know whar they are; may be dead.”

“Perhaps this wife and these children will be sold south.”

“I hope I may die if they be.”

“Why do you not buy your freedom?”

“Master won’t sell me. I offered him a thousand dollars, and pay him
in five years, but he would not sell me. Black men can’t do anything.”

“Are you treated well?”

“Yes; but I work hard; but I would not mind that if my family were with
me.”

“Where are you from?”

“Virginia; left thar many years ago.”

“Where are your parents?”

“Sold south, long ago.”

“Where are your brothers and sisters?”

“Don’t know whar they are; sold to a trader.”

“Do you belong to any church?”

“I belong to the Methodist church, and try to preach.”

“How often do you preach?”

“Most every Sunday.”

“In how many places?”

“Four places.”

“Are you paid for preaching?”

“The black people pay me a little.”

“Do you think your white master will go to heaven?”

“Why, yes.”

“Do you think slavery is right?”

“I can’t think it is.”

“How then can you think slave-holders can be saved?”

“I don’t know how, but I sort of think some of them will be saved.”

“Would you not save all white men and all black men if you could?”

“That I would.”

“Will not God save them all?”

“Why, no.”

“Then you are better than God, are you?”

“Why, master, who ever heard of God saving all men? Now, I think of
it, a man is to preach in Gentryville to-night, who preaches that very
doctrine, and I am bound to hear him.”

“What do the people say about him?”

“They say he is a bad man, and I believe he is, or he would not preach
such a doctrine.”

Here the negro left me to go to his home, and I saw him at the window
of the school-house that evening, the picture of astonishment. Met him
in the street the next day, and he said, “Master, forgive me for what I
said yesterday.”

Lectured in Weston, and became acquainted with Thomas Abbott, who was
residing and preaching in that place. He subsequently moved to St.
Louis, and for several years past has resided in Mt. Vernon, Ind. He
obeys the injunction, “_Go_ and preach.” He does go, far and near; he
labors in season and out of season, in his Master’s service. He has
also become a noted debater, and has had great success in preaching and
debating.

On the other side of the Missouri was Kansas Territory, inhabited
then only by Indians, but now is a populous state, with several large
cities. While I was in Lexington on this journey, or at a subsequent
time, two negroes were hung for murdering their owner. He had whipped
them unmercifully, and they killed him for it. They rode from the
prison to the gallows, through the principal streets of town, in a
wagon, on their coffins; white hoods were on their heads, white frocks
were thrown over their shoulders, and large ropes were around their
necks. On the road to the gallows, the poor creatures sang as loud as
they could scream,

  “I am bound for the kingdom;
   Will you go to glory with me?”

This scene, take it all in all, was the most abominable, outrageous,
and disgusting exhibition I ever witnessed. “What do you think of
_that_?” said I to a Methodist preacher, who was looking on with a
satisfied air. “The majesty of the law must be sustained.” That same
fellow was a hot headed rebel when the war broke out. His name was
Kavanagh; he formerly resided in Indiana. The town was full of negroes;
but they were silent; I saw tears in many of their eyes.

After publishing the _Golden Era_ four years, I disposed of it to
Thomas Abbott, and he soon after connected it with the _Gospel Herald_,
a paper published in Indianapolis, Ind. It was being issued weekly
when it was sold; but I found, by experience, that a weekly paper of
our denomination could not be sustained in St. Louis, the expense of
publishing, and of living being so high. While I issued the paper, I
received hardly any compensation for all my toil; and Mrs. Manford did
all her work gratuitously, and I could not have hired a person to do
what she did for less than five hundred dollars per year.

The _Golden Era_ had done a good work, and it was like parting with
a dear friend to dispose of it. Its circulation when it went out of
my hands, was thirty-five hundred, I think. Its name had become quite
popular. Captain Bursie, who was a subscriber, named his splendid new
steamer, “_The Golden Era_,” and Bridges Brothers, of St. Louis, who
were also subscribers, called a cooking stove they patented, “_The
Golden Era_.”

But I did not cease working for the good cause when the paper was
disposed of; I rather worked harder than ever. For about two years I
was absent most of the time, preaching in Missouri, Illinois, Iowa and
Indiana.

Mrs. Manford was also in the field lecturing, not on theology, but
on temperance, the elevation of woman, and general education. She
delivered some excellent lectures on those subjects in Louisiana,
Hannibal, Macomb, and other places. Let woman speak as well as man
in the lecture-room, and even in the pulpit; let her speak on all
subjects of human interest. As she belongs to the human family, she is
as much interested as man in all intellectual and moral subjects. And
heaven, having gifted her with a soul, instinct with wisdom, purity
and goodness, she is well qualified to instruct and moralize her race.
I know it is quite fashionable for men to flatter women by calling
them their “better half,” “angel,” but to be indignant and disgusted
if they aspire to a position outside of the kitchen or nursery. Such
men are very polite to women in the street and drawing-room, but are
wrathy if they will not be their drudges or play things. As woman is
a citizen of the world as well as man, she is entitled to all the
rights and privileges he is entitled to. The world should be open to
her intellectual and moral activities, that she may make the best use
of her time and talent. Let her “sue and be sued,” buy and sell, vote
at the polls, and be president of these United States, if she can get
votes enough. England’s best rulers have been queens, and why would not
American women make good presidents?

Antiquated, and barbarous laws and customs, that have for ages degraded
woman, are being modified or abandoned; and the day is not far distant
when she will fill the place in society that God designed, and humanity
requires. But it must not be expected that she will come from the
wash-tub, or band-box, in the one place a slave, and in the other a
pet, prepared fully for her new position and responsibilities. She may
long make many blunders, and for a time illy perform her part, all of
which many self-conceited, and self-appointed, “lords of creation” will
point to and triumphantly exclaim, “Did I not tell you women were only
fit for man’s convenience?”

I spent three months in the southwest part of Missouri, traveling on a
circuit I established in that region. Preached monthly in twenty-five
places, and rode from ten to forty miles nearly every day. Tried to
get a minister to continue the work but failed. Good societies could
have been established in Booneville, Georgetown, Calhoun, Clinton,
Oseola, Leesville, Warsaw, Pisgah, Rocheport--places I visited. I also
spent six months traveling and preaching in the northern part of the
state. Visited twenty-two places monthly for six months, and rode most
every day. Spent three days each month at home. I also failed in my
effort to induce a minister to locate in that region. Clergymen of the
liberal faith, residing in the free states, were averse to moving into
Missouri, it then being a slave state. They were not only generally
opposed to slavery, regarding it as “the sum of all villainy,” but
they had no faith our cause could be permanently established among
slave-holders. They thought that human slavery and Universalism were
eternally and universally at war with each other.

The winters of 1855 and ’56 were about the coldest ever experienced in
the West, and I spent both winters in Iowa, traveling and lecturing.
Often rode on horseback all day when the thermometer was far below
zero, and delivered a long discourse at night. The Iowa prairies are
cold places in a cold day, especially to one whose face is northward.
If I had twenty, thirty, or forty miles to ride, I always made it a
rule not to go near a fire till I had finished my day’s travel. Some
men I have rode with, must warm themselves by a fire, whenever they get
a little cold, and swallow perhaps a dram of liquor; and I noticed that
they always suffered much more from cold than I did. The best method
for a traveler, in an arctic day, to get up an internal heat, is, not
by whisky, not by sitting by a fire a few moments, but by thrashing his
arms, swinging his legs, or running a short distance by the side of his
horse.

I had a public discussion in Quincy, Ill., with a Methodist preacher,
which continued four days. Large numbers attended, and much good was
effected. The day after the discussion closed, which was Sunday, a
society was organized, and soon after a meeting-house was erected. The
society prospered for awhile, under the ministry of J. H. Hartzell,
now of Buffalo, N. Y. But he leaving, it was finally disbanded, and
the meeting-house sold, and many of its members united themselves with
the Unitarian society of the place. Quincy is a flourishing town, on
the east bank of the Mississippi river, and is growing rapidly in
importance. The river will probably be bridged there within a few
years.




CHAPTER XVI.


  THE GOLDEN ERA--EXTENSIVE TRAVELING--IN MISSOURI AND KANSAS--TALK
  WITH A DEIST IN JEFFERSON CITY--MOSES--THE PROPHETS--REPLIED
  TO IN PISGAH--TALK WITH A RUM-SELLER--IN KANSAS CITY--IN
  WYANDOTTE--CONVERSATION WITH A CLERGYMAN CONCERNING CHRIST AND HIS
  WORK--LECTURED IN LEAVENWORTH--DESTRUCTION OF MAN’S ENEMIES--IN ST.
  JOSEPH--THE MERCY OF GOD--IN KINGSTON--RICH MAN AND LAZARUS.

As I have said in a previous chapter, the _Golden Era_, after it passed
out of my hands, was merged into the _Gospel Herald_, a paper published
in Indianapolis, Ind., and St. Louis was without a denominational
paper. This was not contemplated when I disposed of that paper. Mr.
Abbott was confident, that with my assistance as editor, it could be
sustained in St. Louis; but experience taught him otherwise. Although
being well satisfied that a weekly paper could not be supported in St.
Louis, I was confident that a monthly magazine could be, and hence
in 1857 I commenced a monthly periodical, called _Manford’s Monthly
Magazine_. It contained twenty-four pages, and the price was one
dollar per year. By the close of the first volume I had two thousand
subscribers--a pretty good beginning. Mrs. Manford was co-editor,
book-keeper, and generally assisted in mailing the magazine.

I resolved to again canvass Missouri, Illinois, Iowa and Indiana, for
the benefit of the new journal; and from 1857 to the spring of 1861, I
was a large portion of the time on the wing. The _Magazine_ was popular
with our people, and I had no difficulty in obtaining subscribers. The
articles were chiefly doctrinal, explanatory, and answers to the ten
thousand objections usually offered to the liberal faith.

During the first year of its publication, I took a horseback journey up
the Missouri river into Kansas, and was absent nearly all winter. At a
hotel in Jefferson City I had the following conversation with a Deist:

“I believe the Old Testament is full of lies, fables and absurdities.
I would as soon believe ‘Guliver’s Travels’ to be divine as the old
Bible.”

“You are too fast, my friend. Without pretending that the Old Testament
is perfect, I find many excellencies in that book. That Moses, the
principal character of it, had a deep insight into many spiritual
realities, must be conceded by every candid person. He was born,
brought up, educated, and lived till he was eighty years old, in the
midst of the grossest superstition. The Egyptians deified the bull,
the cat, the snake, the crocodile; and many of their other religious
notions corresponded with such debased superstitions. Moses boldly
denounced the whole of their mythological abominations; and declared
that there was only one God, and that he was a spiritual being, and
ruled in heaven and on earth. The Egyptians believed in a formal
judgment for every soul after death; Moses taught that God judgeth in
the earth. The Egyptians maintained that there was a hell for some
and a heaven for others over the river of death; Moses taught on all
occasions that virtue is rewarded, and vice is punished, in this
world. These four tenets are the ground-work, the basis, of Moses’
system. He introduced certain forms and ceremonies to be practiced,
till a superior LIGHT would bless the world, and his countrymen be
more advanced in civilization, and when that Light came they were
laid aside. But his doctrines of one God, who rules the universe, and
rewards virtue and punishes vice, are not obsolete. They are eternal
truths, and you say you believe them. You are then a disciple of Moses,
fool as you say he was. That Moses did not know the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, is readily admitted; that all he said and
did were not divine, is also admitted; and it is also conceded that
sometimes his spirit did not seem to harmonize with the forgiving
spirit of Christ. But with all his imperfections, he was a man among
men; he was the tallest man of his day, and his brow was bathed in the
rising sun, when the world was yet shrouded in darkness.”

“To that view of Moses I do not much object. But what is called the
history of the Jews, is contradictory, and often much exaggerated.”

“There may be errors in the Bible history of the Jews, but the
main statements are doubtless correct. The writers thereof make no
pretention to inspiration, that I know of. You do not reject the
history of the United States, because some of the writers thereof
contradict each other.”

“Well, there are the pretended prophets; do you think they were God’s
prophets?”

“Many events they predicted have taken place. I believe, sir, that
God has had prophets in all ages and climes. All history, ancient and
modern, is full of the supernatural element. It is found in Grecian,
Roman, European, and American histories. It is found in the life of
Socrates, Plato, Origen, Joan of Arc, Swedenborg, Stirling, Lavater,
Oberlin, Wesley, Luther, Murray, and in the life of innumerable other
worthies of whom the world is not worthy. We find them among the
despised and forsaken. They have been spit upon in all the streets in
the world. They have been burned at the stake as enemies of God and
man. But they cared for none of these things; they knew that they were
walking in the light of heaven, and all the powers of darkness could
not terrify their brave souls.

“We pity the Indian prince’s ignorance of the fact that water by cold
is converted into solid ice. He was sure that such a phenomena was
unnatural, and ‘contrary to all human experience.’ We know though
that it is done; and if we know anything of the history of mankind, we
must admit that it teaches that supernaturalism has been prevalent at
all times. But if we pronounce this revelation of the historic page,
delusion, to be consistent we should call all history imposition, for
the supernatural is as well attested as any statement of history. The
truth is, there is an unseen hand directing all the affairs of the
universe; and man, whether living or dying, in time or in eternity,
is constantly controlled, more or less, by that invisible power. It
is man’s natural condition to be in alliance with the spiritual. When
he is material in all his hopes and aspirations, coarse and brutish,
he is in an unnatural condition, and the spirit of God almost parts
with him, and leaves him nearly alone in his sins. But the pure and
good are exalted to heavenly places, commune with the spirits of the
just, and are enveloped in an halo of glory. Some rise so high, that
the hand of God is on their brow, and then they see visions, dream
dreams, heal the sick, raise the dead, and cast out devils. Such are
God’s prophets; such were the Jewish prophets, and the world in all
ages has been blessed with the divine utterances of such godly men and
women. Although their brows were immersed in the sun-light of heaven,
their feet were on this earth, and hence we may expect to find their
revelations sometimes tinged with the darkness of earth.”

Lectured in Pisgah, and a man gave notice that he should reply the
next Sunday. I begged of him to offer his objections while I was in
town; he would not consent to, but said, “On next Sunday I will show
that you deny the Bible, and teach a bundle of lies.” “Name one lie I
have uttered to-night.” “You can not get me into a controversy now.”
Preached in Booneville, and then proceeded to Marshall, where I spoke
twice. Had some talk with a rum-seller.

“Do you think it right to poison and impoverish all you can?”

“I don’t poison or impoverish.”

“You don’t! Every dram you sell poisons and impoverishes somebody. The
body is the habitation built for the soul, made in the image and glory
of God to dwell in; and it is your business from early morn to late at
night, to stand in your den and deal damnation to God’s noble work.
What abominable business for a man to engage in! What a life to live!
What prostitution of time and opportunities! I should think you would
be fearful that the indignant earth would open its jaws and crush you
to atoms.”

“If your doctrine is true I am safe.”

“As my doctrine is true I would not stand in your shoes for all of this
world. You are a curse to yourself, your family, and this town. The
fires that are consuming you, are scorching all with whom you come in
contact.”

“But you preach that all will be saved, and of course I am included.”

“You will not be saved in this world, nor in the world to come, till
you repent of your sins in sackcloth and ashes, and by the grace of
God are thoroughly regenerated. You will have to work out your own
salvation; and judging from your business, that you occupy a very low
plane in this world, morally and spiritually, I fear you will fill a
low one in the other land, and will have to work long and hard ere you
will know much about heaven. I advise you not to credit the slang of
Orthodox preachers, that according to Universalism all will be saved
any how. We believe in nothing of that kind. The pure and good only
are saved in this world, and the pure and good only will be saved in
the immortal world. Now, my friend, permit me to give you one word
of advice--sell no more liquor, drink no more liquor, engage in some
honest calling, and live soberly, righteously and godly the remainder
of your days. By doing so, you will live better, die happier--you will
know something of heaven in this world.”

Lectured in Miami, then crossed the Missouri river to Dewitt, where
I spoke several times. A society was subsequently formed there, but
the war broke it up. Held meetings in all the towns on both sides of
the river to St. Joseph. In Kansas City lectured five times. This is
destined to be a large place. It occupies a central position, and right
in the way of trade and travel. It is on the bank of the Missouri
river, and the Pacific railroad passes through the town. Other roads
are contemplated, some or all of which will doubtless be built. It is
also in the midst of one of the finest agricultural regions of the
world.

Lectured in Wyandotte, Kansas. This town joins Kansas City, and like
two drops, they will become one--commercially, at least. Its site is
magnificent, the ground gradually ascending from the river, and ere
long it will be a rich and populous place. An Episcopal minister asked
me various questions concerning the doctrine every where spoken against.

“Do your people think Jesus Christ was a human being?”

“We think he was. He certainly possessed a human constitution and
organization; was subject to hunger and thirst; was weary and cold,
and was liable to the pains and agonies ‘flesh is heir to.’ He grew
from childhood to youth, and thence to manhood. Hence the New Testament
says, ‘For we have not a high priest which cannot be touched with the
feelings of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we
are, yet without sin.’ Heb. iv. 15. ‘But made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness
of men: And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.’ Phil. ii.
7, 8. ‘And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.’ John i. 14.
He was a man, and would have died ultimately had he lived in an age of
justice and toleration.”

“What was the object of his death?”

“I will answer in the language of the Bible. ‘For Christ also hath once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God.’ 1 Peter iii. 18. ‘For it became him, for whom are all things, and
by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the
captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.’ Heb. ii. 10.
‘For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son.’ Rom. v. 10. Jesus came, not to appease God’s wrath, or to
quench the fire of hell.

  “’Twas not to quench eternal fire,
     That Jesus came and spilt his blood,
   Not to appease his Father’s ire,
     But to reconcile the world to God.’

“His noble example in dying for man, has strengthened the martyr’s
faith on many a scaffold, and when chained to many a fiery stake. And
he died like them, a martyr to truth and righteousness. He _taught_
love to God and man; he _lived_ what he taught, and he died confirming
his _teaching_ and his _life_. That precept, that life, and that death,
have been a power in the world for eighteen hundred years, and they
will be a power in this world in all coming time.”

“But the Bible talks about man being saved by the _blood_, or _death_
of Christ. Do you think there was no special efficacy in his blood and
death?”

“We say that our fathers died to save us from the oppression of Great
Britain. In the same sense Christ died to save us from the bondage of
sin, and to cleanse us from all allegiance to despotism. Blood from
any one’s veins can only cleanse in a figurative sense. It is the
truth which Jesus taught that cleanseth the soul; and as his blood was
shed in attestation of the truth, the Bible refers figuratively to
that blood as the efficient cause of our deliverance and salvation. In
this sense he ‘bore our sins and our iniquities,’ was ‘wounded for our
transgressions,’ and ‘by his stripes we are healed.’”

“There are men in high places in our church who entertain similar
views, but in my estimation, they are erroneous. I accept the creed
of the church, that Jesus was God, and of all the sequences of that
proposition.”

Proceeded to Leavenworth, where I delivered four discourses. This
was then a small town, but is now a large city, and destined to be
a very important one. We ought to have a minister at work there. A
large congregation could soon be gathered. There are many influential
families who would give such a man their hearty support. While here I
heard the following conversation in an adjoining room at an hotel:

“Did you attend the Universalist meeting last night?”

“No; I have no faith in the creed of that church. What was the
preacher’s text?”

“‘I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ,’ were the words. I must
confess, I was much interested. It was the first Universalist sermon
I ever heard, and I am inclined to think it was the first _gospel_
sermon I ever heard. I have, all my life, heard about the abominations
of Universalism, and I supposed it was a mass of corruption. But if
that man last night preached Universalism, I don’t know but I must be a
Universalist.”

“What did he say that took you so?”

“Among other things he said, salvation was not from hell, but from sin,
from error, from mental darkness; that Jesus came not to save us from
eternal burnings, but to make us good fathers, mothers, brothers,
sisters, children, neighbors, friends, citizens. There is good sense in
that.”

“What did he say about the gospel?”

“That it is good news from God to man--that all sin, suffering and
death will be ultimately abolished, and that God will be all in all. He
said, that the meaning of the word gospel is good news, and that the
whole system corresponds with the signification of the word.”

“Did he say anything about hell? Of course he did not, as there is no
hell in his faith.”

“He did not say much on that subject, but gave notice that this evening
he would give the Bible doctrine of hell, and you had better go and
hear what he has to say. The Orthodox view of religion never satisfied
me, and I am bound to look into this new faith.”

A society was organized at the close of one of the meetings, and this
man united himself with it.

Spent two days in Weston, Mo., and preached twice. Agreeably to
request, I delivered a discourse on the destruction of the enemies
to God and man, and took for my text, “The last enemy, death, shall
be destroyed.” 1 Cor. xv. I remarked, 1. Sin is an enemy to man, but
that is to be destroyed. “Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the
_sin_ of the world.” “For this purpose was the Son of God manifested
that he might destroy the _works_ of the devil.” Sin, then, is to be
destroyed. 2. The devil is to be destroyed. “Forasmuch as the children
are partakers of flesh and blood, he also took part of the same; that
through death he might destroy him that hath the power of death,
that is, the _devil_.” Thus, the devil, and all his works, are to be
destroyed. 3. Pain is an enemy to man, and that is to be destroyed.
“There shall be no more _pain_, neither shall there be _sorrow_ nor
_crying_, for the former things are passed away.” How false is the
doctrine of endless suffering, endless sorrowing, endless weeping. 4.
Hell is an enemy; but the Scriptures teach, that it is to be destroyed.
“O, _hell_, I will be thy destruction.” And an apostle asks the
triumphant question, “O death, where is thy sting? O grave, (_hades_
or _hell_) where is thy victory?” 5. Death is also an enemy, and it is
to be destroyed. We read, “He will swallow up _death_ in victory, and
the Lord God will wipe tears from all faces.” “There shall be no more
_death_;” and the text asserts that, “The last enemy, _death_, shall
be destroyed.” But how can death be destroyed if millions of mankind
are to be eternally the victims of death? In the language of Dr. Adam
Clarke, “Death is conquered, hell disappointed, the devil confounded,
and sin totally destroyed. Amen! Hallelujah! The Lord God, omnipotent
reigneth! He shall reign forever and ever!”

Notwithstanding this distinct and emphatic testimony, it is contended
by many people, with the Bible in their hands, that sin, pain, death,
hell, and the devil, will eternally prey on countless multitudes of our
race; and if you intimate to them that those enemies to our peace and
hope will be destroyed, they cry, delusion, imposture, infidelity. But
I trust in God, and believe in the divine promise of the end of all
evil, and the bringing in of “everlasting righteousness.”

I also lectured in St. Joseph three evenings. At the close of one of my
meetings, a preacher remarked, “You have been talking about the mercy
of God, but will not God’s wrath last as long as his mercy?” I replied,
without stopping to inquire what is meant by the wrath or anger of
God, the Bible emphatically declares that “His anger endureth for a
_moment_, but his mercy from everlasting to everlasting.” Again, “He
retaineth _not his anger forever_, because he delighteth in mercy.”
“I will _not contend forever, neither will I be always wroth_.” Why
not? “Because the spirit would fail before me, and the souls which
I have made.” Can you give as good a reason why he will be always
wroth, why he will contend forever, as he has why he will not? Pain
tends to destroy the sufferer. Let a person endure intense agony,
and if medical aid does not relieve him, death will soon step in and
deliver the sufferer. This is a merciful provision of our heavenly
Father, to prevent very protracted suffering. The passage just cited
teaches, that God will not permit any one to suffer long because that
suffering would end his existence. “The spirit would fail before me,
and the souls I have made.” The soul could not endure _endless wrath_;
it would fail, or cease to be. Jeremiah asks the question, “Will he
reserve his anger forever? Will he keep it to the end?” Now observe
the answer, “I am merciful saith the Lord, and will _not keep anger
forever_.” Again it is said, “For his anger endureth for a _moment_,
weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.” The
prophet Isaiah records, “In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for
a _moment_; but with _everlasting_ kindness will I have mercy on thee,
saith the Lord.” Again it is said, “The Lord will not cast off forever,
but though he cause grief, yet he will have compassion according to the
multitude of his tender mercies.” We read the following, “My mercy will
keep forevermore.” “For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting.”
In one Psalm it is twenty-six times asserted that “The mercy of the
Lord _endureth forever_.” Hence it is said, “God is _rich_ in mercy.”
“_Plenteous_ in mercy.” We also read of his mercy in the plural form.
They are said to be “great,” “manifold,” and “over all his works.”
The apostle Paul believed in God’s mercy, for he says, “For he hath
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have MERCY ON ALL!”

From all this precious testimony, I conclude that the “wrath of
God,” let it mean what it may, will continue but a _moment_, while
his mercy is as endless as his own existence. The mother may forget
the son of her love, but God will never forget the souls he has made.
God is merciful to us to-day, he will be to-morrow, and forever. No
circumstance or place can turn his love into hatred, his goodness into
cruelty. His mercy blesses us in this world, and it will bless us in
the world to come. Death cannot change the great love God has for the
soul.

Delivered a series of discourses in Kingston, on the following
subjects:--“The Character of God”--“Man as he Is and is to
Be”--“Rewards and Punishments”--“The Future Life”--“The Restitution.”
Our faith was new to the people, as a discourse in its defense had not
been before delivered in the county. A Baptist minister replied to
one of the sermons; he had traveled ten miles to attend the meeting.
He dwelt on the Rich Man and Lazarus. Denied it being a parable, and
said it was a literal account of two men in this world, and world to
come--one in heaven and the other in hell--and that their fate in
eternity would be the fate of all mankind--part would ascend to heaven,
and the balance would sink into the regions of eternal fire.

I replied as follows: If the gentleman is correct in asserting that the
text is to be understood literally, the following are FACTS, concerning
the Hereafter: 1. Hell is a _place_, not a state or condition, but a
place; has a local habitation as well as a name; has length, width,
depth and highth; in fact, is the penitentiary of the universe. Hell
is called in the passage, “this _place_ of torment.” 2. Hell is a
_fiery furnace_. The rich man says, “I am tormented in these _flames_,”
and begs for a drop of water to cool his tongue. 3. “This place of
torment,” this region of fire, is within speaking distance of heaven.
Abraham and the rich man had a talk on some interesting topics.
Heaven and hell, then, are neighbors. They are located side by side;
the division fence being a gulf. 4. If the fate of those two men is
to be the fate of all mankind, the world is to be divided. Parents
and children, husbands and wives, brothers and sisters, friends and
neighbors, are to be eternally separated--part to be in heaven, and
part in hell.

Now, I want to know if there could be any happiness in such a heaven.
Could parents be happy seeing their children in hell, as Abraham saw
the “rich man?” Could children be happy, beholding the mother who bore
them, and the father who loved them, writhing in the liquid flames,
the cursed of God, and the sport of devils? Could the wife behold
the beloved partner of her life, suffering immortal agony in the
fiery furnace, and rejoice and sing praise? I read a few days since a
Presbyterian Sabbath School report, and the writer states, that “heaven
will be made up of remnants of ruined families.” Nearly every family
will be ruined--a remnant only will escape the dreadful wreck. To
expect happiness in such a heaven, would be like expecting oranges to
grow on icebergs. But if the gentleman is right in his interpretation
of the passage before us, there is just such a heaven, and just such a
hell; and about every family will be irredeemably ruined, and eternally
divided. The nearest approach to such a shocking scene, is a band of
naked and painted savages, laughing and dancing around the blazing
stake, at which their victims are burning. There is your heaven, and
your hell, on a small scale.

But to prevent the denizens of heaven becoming _insane_ at such a
frightful spectacle, it is said, their _memory_ will be destroyed;
they will not remember they ever had dear friends on earth. Yes, and
they will have to have their _eyes_ put out, for Abraham could see the
rich man. They will also have to be as deaf as adders, else the cries,
groans and lamentations of hell will ever be sounding in their ears.
But it must be evident to every reflecting mind, that the text is not
to be understood _literally_, but _figuratively_. It is doubtless a
parable, a fable, and its _moral_ is one of the most interesting and
instructive lessons in the New Testament.

I have not room here for the interpretation I gave the passage; but
the preacher, at the close, admitted that the view presented seemed
reasonable, and was, perhaps, correct. A rum-seller here told me, that
he had been through religion, and was satisfied it was all humbug. I
told him that he would, perhaps, be improved if religion should go
_through_ him.

I also lectured several times in Chillicothe. My subjects were,
“Sin”--“Death”--“Hell”--“Salvation.” One man remarked to me, after
hearing the discourse on Sin,

“Jesus says, ‘If you die in your sins, where God and Christ are, ye
cannot come.’”

“My friend, there is no such passage in the Bible.”

“Ah, but there is,” said he; “I have read it many a time.”

“But you are mistaken. The passage you quoted at, reads thus: ‘Then
said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and ye
shall die in your sins; whither I go ye cannot come.’ John viii. 21.
You perceive the true reading is very different from your version.
These words were addressed to the Jews. A short time afterwards he
had occasion to address his disciples; and mark what he said to them.
‘Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me;
and as I said to the Jews, Whither I go ye cannot come, _so say I
unto you_.’ John xiii. 33. Now, if Jesus when he told the Jews that
they could not go to him, meant they should not inherit immortal
blessedness, he must have meant the same when he addressed the
disciples, for you perceive, he said precisely the same to them. But
nothing of the kind was intended when he addressed friend or foe. He
only meant in both cases, that they could not much longer follow him
from place to place, as they had been in the habit of doing. He was
about to depart from this world, and they would have to remain on earth.

“Many of the Jews did die in their sins, but it does not thence follow
that they are condemned to sin forever. Because a man sins this year it
does not follow he will sin all his life-time. God is not so in love
with sin that he will compel a soul to sin eternally because this life
was mis-spent. What would be thought of a farmer who compelled a man to
cut down every tree in his orchard because he had cut down one tree?
And will the God of wisdom and goodness, compel all to sin eternally
who die sinners? If yea, then nearly all mankind will be forever lost,
for nearly all die sinners in some degree. The law is, ‘Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul and strength, and thy
neighbor as thyself.’ Now, who obeys that law? But few indeed, I
fear. Nearly all mankind, then, will be forever lost if there is no
redemption for those who die sinners.

“But the good Book teaches, that sin will not debase the soul always;
but rather that there is to be ‘an end of sin.’ Dan. ix. Transferring
all sin and all sinners to hell would not exactly be destroying sin nor
converting sinners to God. It would simply be removing sin and sinners
to another locality--that is all. Transporting all the drunkards from
St. Louis to Chicago, would not be destroying intemperance. It would
only be removing the curse from one place to another--nothing more.
But when the Bible talks about sin being _destroyed, making an end_ of
sin, it means just what it says. It does not mean that it will _not_ be
destroyed, will _not_ end its reign.”

From Chillicothe I journeyed to Dewitt. I well remember of traveling
that road at another time. It was one of the hottest days of summer,
and I rode on horseback, from early morn till late at night, in the
blazing sun, without a particle of food. About mid-day, I called at a
house to get a drink of water, and the good woman conducted me to the
back porch where were two buckets of ice and water--one bucket for
the white folks, and the other for the negroes, and told me to keep
myself to the refreshing contents of the former. Never shall I forget
that blessed bucket, and its thrice blessed treasure. I thought of the
spring in the desert, gushing forth its cooling draught; of

  “The old oaken bucket,
   The moss covered bucket,
   The iron bound bucket,
   That hung in the well,”

And of Jesus resting, as I was resting, at the Samaritan well.

After traveling about one week more, I reached home after a long
absence; having delivered seventy-five discourses, and rode some seven
hundred miles--all on horseback.




CHAPTER XVII.


  THE REBELLION COMMENCED--WHAT SENATOR DOUGLAS SAID--DEFENDERS OF OUR
  COUNTRY--CAMP JACKSON--REBEL FLAG--GREAT EXPECTATIONS--SUBSCRIBERS
  LOST--MONEY LOST--ALL BUT TWO OF THE RELIGIOUS JOURNALS
  STOPPED--COULD DO BUT LITTLE IN MISSOURI--SOCIETY IN ST. LOUIS--G.
  S. WEAVER LEFT--THE UNITARIAN SOCIETY--PUBLISHED PAMPHLET ON WATER
  BAPTISM--DISCUSSION WITH B. H. SMITH--EXTRACTS FROM THE DISCUSSION.

While sitting at the breakfast-table, at a boarding-house in St. Louis,
on the morning of the 14th of April, 1861, it was announced through the
morning paper, that the South Carolinians had fired on Fort Sumter. I
remarked, “The rebels will rue that traitorous deed.” The landlady took
fire, and with eyes darting vengeance, said, “We are _Southrons_.” “If
you are _Southrons_ you need not be rebels.” The whole city was wild
with excitement. Americans had fired on their own flag, civil war was
inaugurated; but how far it would extend, and what would be the result,
were problems the wisest could not solve. Would the whole land be
desolated? Would treason, with fire and sword, march through the length
and breadth of the country, scattering death and destruction, where
peace, harmony and happiness had so long prevailed? Was the sun of the
Great Republic about to set, and set in blood, fire and desolation? Was
our glorious Union about to be rent asunder by profane hands? Where
would the division end? Would it be torn in two, twenty, or thirty
parts? No wonder loyal men and women were excited and alarmed.

A day or two after the announcement of that insane act of South
Carolina, I heard a man on Fourth street read a private dispatch he had
just received from Senator Douglas at Washington, “_Tell my friends
they must sustain the government._” It made my heart leap for joy, and
I exclaimed to a by-stander, “God bless Douglas.” “God d---- him,” said
an enraged “Southron.” In a few days more, President Lincoln’s call
for volunteers was published; and then the drum began to beat; and the
farmers, mechanics, merchants, doctors, lawyers, preachers, all over
the land, left their homes and enrolled themselves, “DEFENDERS OF OUR
COUNTRY.” And many a prayer went up to heaven for their protection and
success. When General Lyon, a few weeks after, marched five thousand
loyal soldiers through the city and captured “Camp Jackson,” the union
portion of the population were delighted, but the rebels were dismayed.
For weeks a rebel flag had been hanging over a building on the corner
of Pine and Fifth streets, the head-quarters of treason, and several
leading papers in the city working to get Missouri out of the Union.
These treason plotters, north and south, east and west, had great
expectations. One of them said to me,

“We shall succeed. The South will sustain itself. The North will not
fight. And having the mouth of the Mississippi river, the South will
compel the Western States to join them; we shall have a strong and
magnificent government, and the Eastern States may go to destruction
for ought we care.”

I replied: “Three or four years of war will open your eyes, if you
shall have any then to open, with regard to the North and the South. Do
not delude yourself with the fancy, that the northern people will not
fight for the _right_; you will find that they will fight, and as men
hardly ever before did fight. It is true they greatly prefer the arts
of peace; but when their country is in danger, the country for which
their fathers bled and died, you will find that the spirit of ’76 is
not degenerated. You do not know what you are about; you are insane.
You are disturbing a lion, and by and by he will spring to his feet
and crush you to death.”

But after the Camp Jackson affair, and the citizens were taught by
several bloody lessons, to let the soldiers pass through the streets
undisturbed, we had peace and safety in St. Louis. The rebel element
was strong, but it was harmless amid a preponderance of loyalty,
supported by an army of the “boys in blue.” But in Missouri, outside of
St. Louis, with the exception of here and there a place where soldiers
were stationed, there was but little peace, or safety.

I had nearly three thousand subscribers in Missouri, and the Southern
States, when the war commenced, and I lost all the Southern, and nearly
all the Missouri subscribers, by the mails being discontinued, and
by the general confusion that reigned. My loss was, at least, five
thousand dollars. Three religious periodicals--Methodist, Baptist and
Presbyterian--were discontinued at the beginning of the strife. The
former was suppressed by General Lyon, for its treasonable utterances.
The _Magazine_ and the _Central Christian Advocate_, were the only
religious journals that survived the outbreak. The _Magazine_ was
pretty badly crippled, and but for the aid it received from the loyal
states, it would have succumbed.

I traveled and preached but little in Missouri during the war. Most of
the men were in the army, north or south; some left the state, and the
few who remained did not think much about religion. The society in St.
Louis went to the shades. Mr. Weaver left the year before the war, and
located in Lawrence, Mass., where he has been remarkably successful.
He is a noble man, and an excellent pastor and preacher. Before a
successor to him could be obtained, the war broke out, and that killed
the society. Our cause was always feeble in St. Louis. The Unitarian
society was old, numerous, well established, and rich; but instead of
aiding us by its sympathy and co-operation, it stood off as cold as an
iceberg. I hear much of the love Unitarians bear for us, but have never
seen much evidence of their love. They doubtless would like to have
Unitarians and Universalists unite, but it must be like the marriage of
man and woman, according to Blackstone, the twain must be one, and that
one, Unitarian. We are fine fellows if we will allow ourselves to be
swallowed, head and heels, without kicking.

About this time, I published a pamphlet entitled “Seventy-two Reasons
why Salvation is not by Water Baptism.” The Reformers, or Campbellites,
a numerous and growing sect in the West and South, contend, as is
well known, that immersion in water is a condition of salvation. This
pamphlet is designed to refute that strange notion. The following is
the twenty-eighth “Reason”:

“Then said Peter unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins; and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” Acts ii. 38.

If “baptized” here refers to water baptism, it is the only place in
the New Testament where it is connected with “remission of sin.” And
shall all that Christ and his apostles have said about sin being
removed by grace, hope, faith, repentance, be set aside, because in
one instance baptism and remission of sins are mentioned in connection
with each other? But even in this passage Peter tells his hearers to
_repent_ “for the remission of sins,” and there is common sense in that
exhortation. Repentance means to reform, to cease doing evil and learn
to do well, and when that is done, of course, our sins are remitted.
If a drunkard repents, reforms, the sin of intemperance is remitted,
and so of all other sins--when we abandon them, they abandon us. If
we resist the devil he will flee from us. That is what forgiveness,
pardon, and remission of sin means. And that is what Peter means in
the above words, as is evident from his address to the people in Acts
iii. 19. “Repent ye, therefore, and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out.” Here baptism is left out, clearly showing that the
author, in the other place, did not mean that water puts away sin.
The same is taught by Jesus. “And that _repentance_ and _remission
of sins_ should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning
at Jerusalem.” Luke xxiv. 47. Nothing about water. The apostle Paul
teaches the same truth. “Whom God hath sent forth to be a propitiation
through FAITH in his blood, to declare his righteousness, for the
REMISSION OF SINS.” Rom. iii. 25. Here again baptism has no credit for
remitting sin; it is done through faith. Again this apostle says, “This
is the covenant that I will make with them after those days, saith the
Lord, I will put my law into their hearts, and in their minds I will
write them: and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now
where REMISSION of these is, there is no more offering for sin.” Heb.
x. 16, 17, 18. Of course, when the law of God reigns supreme in men’s
hearts, their sins are remitted, whether they have been baptized or
not. It is the law of love that banishes sin, not water baptism. It is
evident from the above testimony, that water baptism has nothing to do
in putting away sin, and that the Reformers have departed far from the
truth in their notions about the saving influence of water baptism.

And here is another error they commit. They are forever telling us
that the kingdom of God was set up on “the day of Pentecost.” Their
notion runs about thus--Jesus Christ set up his kingdom on “the day of
Pentecost.” The key thereof being given to Peter, he unlocked it on
that occasion, and commenced baptizing men and women into the kingdom.
Baptism is the door. Not a living man, woman, or child was inside the
door when Peter opened it. On this theological curiosity we have a
few words to offer. 1. We have not a particle of evidence that the
kingdom of God was set up on that occasion. Peter, who was the sole
speaker, said not one word about the kingdom of God, not one word
about its keys, not one word about unlocking it, not one word about
baptism being the door into the kingdom, not one word about immersing
anybody into it. If the august kingdom of the living God was really set
up, opened, dedicated, and Jesus commenced his reign on “the day of
Pentecost,” it is very remarkable that there is not one word said about
any of these important matters by the great apostle. Our Reformers draw
largely on their imagination for their _facts_ when they expatiate
about Pentecost. 2. Water baptism is the door into the kingdom, is it?
The kingdom, then, which is purely a _spiritual_ institution, has a
_material_ door! What an idea! And it was reserved for the nineteenth
century to make that wonderful discovery. 3. If our friends are right
in their curious notions, we should like to be informed how the first
one got into the kingdom. When Peter opened it not a soul was inside,
and no one could get in without being baptized. Now, we should like
to have one of their wise men tell us how the first one got inside.
Did Peter baptize him in? But Peter was an “outsider.” And will our
friends pretend that one _out_ of the kingdom could lawfully initiate
one _into it_? This, though, must have been done, or some one must have
slipped inside without immersion, and then went to work in good earnest
putting others through the watery door into the spiritual kingdom. 4.
If our friends are right, not one of the twelve apostles entered the
kingdom of God, for they were not baptized _before_, _at_, or _after_
Pentecost. Not even Mathias, who was chosen after the resurrection of
Christ, was baptized. They did not enter through this singular door.
How then can they be saved?

Soon after this pamphlet appeared, I made arrangements with B. H.
Smith, pastor of the Reformers’ church in St. Louis, to have a
discussion in the _Magazine_ on the efficacy of water baptism. He
proposed affirming that “Water Baptism is a Condition of Salvation.”
He was to write twelve letters. He wrote seven and then laid aside his
pen, and I could never induce him to write any more. The following is
part of my reply to his first letter:

You advocate a proposition that consigns nearly all mankind to hopeless
ruin. You affirm that water baptism is a condition of salvation, and
consequently that there is not, and cannot be, any salvation without
immersion in water. Your brethren, generally, adopt the same theory.
Rev. Alexander Campbell, well known to be a prominent man in your
fraternity, distinctly avows your position. Speaking of the “act of
faith” which he declares to be immersion in water, he says, “Whatever
the act of faith may be, it necessarily becomes the line of demarkation
between the two states before described. On this side, and on the other
side, mankind are in quite different states. On one side they are
pardoned, justified, sanctified, reconciled, adopted and saved: and on
the other, they are in a state of condemnation. This act is sometimes
called immersion, regeneration, conversion.” (_Christian System_, page
193.) This “act of faith,” you see, is immersion in water, and is
called “regeneration,” and “conversion.” On one side, that is, all who
are immersed, are “saved, pardoned, justified, sanctified, reconciled,
adopted,” but those on the other side, that is, not immersed in water,
are condemned, lost, unpardoned, unsanctified, etc. In one word,
immersion is the line between heaven and hell, between the saved and
the damned, between those God loves and those he hates. On page 197,
he says that “Immersion is _inseparably_ connected with the remission
of sins,”--“no person was said to be converted until he was immersed;
and all persons who were immersed, were said to be converted.” The same
saving power is attached to immersion all through Mr. Campbell’s book.
But, sir, reason, common sense, common justice, and every thing else
that even _squints_ toward the true and right, condemn such a theory.
But as you appeal to the New Testament to sustain your proposition, I
trust I can show you misunderstand its letter and spirit.

Your doctrine of the purifying power of water baptism, is rank
Heathenism. The Pagans, publicly and privately, used lustral water,
which they thought had the virtue of purifying the soul, and of
remitting the punishment of sins. “The Indians,” writes father Jesuit
Bonchet, a missionary to India, “say that in bathing--that is,
immersing--in certain rivers, sins are _entirely_ remitted; and that
their mysterious waters, wash not only the bodies, but also purify the
souls in an admirable manner.” This testimony, Chateaubriand adds, is
confirmed by the “Memoirs of the English Society of Calcutta.” The
waters of the Ganges are supposed by the Hindoos, to purify those who
are immersed in them. This sounds very much like your proposition. The
Catholics, like yourself, have incorporated this item of Heathenism
into their faith. Their General Catechism treats on baptism thus:

_Q._ What is baptism?

_A._ A sacrament which cleanses from original sin, makes us christians
and children of God; and heirs to the kingdom of heaven.

_Q._ Does baptism also remit the actual sins committed before it?

_A._ Yes; and all the punishment due them.

_Q._ Is baptism necessary to salvation?

_A._ Yes; without it, we cannot enter the kingdom of God.

You agree exactly with the Romish Church. Both you and that church
contend, that baptism cleanses the soul, makes us christians, children
of God, heirs of heaven. You say, that “baptism is a condition of
salvation,” and the Pope says, “baptism is necessary to salvation.”
The Pagans call the baptismal water, “lustral water;” the Catholics,
“holy water,” and your people, “regenerating water.” Mr. Campbell says,
“No one acquainted with Peter’s style, will think it strange that Paul
represents as _saved_, _cleansed_, or _sanctified_ by _water_--may not
he then call that water, of which a person is born again, the _water_,
or bath of _regeneration_.” (_Christian System_, page 265.) You will
observe that you, the Catholics and Pagans, are beautifully harmonious
concerning the saving power of water.

The savages of the West, appear to be strictly Orthodox in their
notions concerning the regenerating influence of water. In the early
settlement of the West, two whites were captured by a band of Indians;
and when on the bank of the Ohio, they were led into the river
and immersed by their savage captors. The chief then informed his
prisoners, that this immersion had changed their characters--that they
were no longer pale faces, but Indians, and were members of the tribe.
We smile at the red man’s absurdity, but let us be careful and not be
equally absurd. This is the first account we have of a western stream
being deemed a “bath of regeneration;” but since then another people
have christened all the rivers, creeks and ponds in the West, “baths of
regenerations.”

In the course of the correspondence, I offered the following objections
to his theory:

1. “Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God
made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all
the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Unto you first, God having raised
up his Son, Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you
from his iniquities.” Acts iii. 25, 26. This is from Peter’s sermon,
delivered on Solomon’s porch, and from which you have quoted in your
argument. Your position is, that salvation is only for those who are
immersed, and as but a very small part of mankind are immersed, but a
small part of mankind will be blessed with salvation. But the above
passage promises blessedness to “all the kindreds of the earth,” and
we are informed what that blessing is--“Turning away every one of you
from his _iniquities_.” That is the blessing, and it is promised to all
mankind. Mr. Campbell, in the book from which I have before quoted,
page 135, admits the _universality_ of the promise, and says that the
“blessing is _spiritual_ and _eternal_.” How he or you can restrict
salvation to the _few_ who are immersed, with this passage before your
eyes, and this admission, is a mystery.

2. If you are correct, but a _small portion_ of mankind will be
saved--only those who are immersed in water. Every child, dying in
childhood, every idiot, every Jew, every Mohammedan, every Pagan, every
Catholic, every Episcopalian, every Methodist, every Presbyterian, must
go to hell, if you are right. You deny salvation to every body who is
not baptized. If you are correct, hell will be _crowded_, and heaven
almost _empty_. My God! what a theory!

3. According to your proposition, a person may spend three score years
and ten in crime of the blackest dye; may trample under foot the laws
of both God and man, and receive little or no punishment in this world;
and by being immersed the last hour of his wicked life, his sins are
all washed away, and he occupy as high a seat in heaven as St. John
or St. Paul. Now, the Bible teaches that every transgression and
disobedience shall receive a just recompense of reward. (Heb. ii. 2.)
“He that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath done;
and there is no respect of persons.” Col. iii. 25. Your theory makes
a “respect of persons;” it says that the immersed “shall NOT receive
for the wrong which they have done,” but that wrath and vengeance will
be meted out forever and ever on the unimmersed. “For the Son of man
shall come in the glory of the Father with his angels; and then shall
he reward every man according to his works.” Matt. xvi. 27. Mr. Smith
affirms, that heaven will render to the _unimmersed_ “according to
their works,” but the immersed will be saved from the just punishment
of their sins. “For we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body,
according to that he hath done, whether good or bad.” 2 Cor. v. 10. Mr.
Smith denies that God will punish the immersed for the wicked deeds
they have done. In fact, his theory asserts that God will not punish
them at all, but saves them from the penalty of their sins. This, also,
is a very serious objection to your proposition, and I hope it will
receive from you something besides a laugh.

4. A wretch murders in cold blood a thousand unbaptized, good men, and,
according to your proposition, not one of them can be saved--they die
unwashed of their sins and must be lost. As soon as he has killed their
bodies, and sent their souls to hell, he attends Mr. Smith’s meetings,
on Olive street, listens to one of his excellent exhortations to come
forward and be immersed into the fold of God. He gives you his bloody
hand, makes the good confession, and is immersed at the levee--the
very spot where he murdered the men, and some of their dead bodies are
still at his feet. His sins are all forgiven, his soul is pure, and he
is an heir of heaven. But in going back to the sanctuary, he stumbles
over one of the dead bodies of his victims, falls to the ground and
breaks his neck. He complied with the “conditions of salvation,” and
his sanctified soul is wafted right to heaven. But the thousand
victims of his wickedness, not having been immersed, although they
were righteous men, are lost forever. According to Mr. Smith’s theory,
just such a series of events may occur. One man may kill a thousand
men; their souls may all go to hell; and the murderer, by faith and
immersion, may be saved from all the consequences of deeds that have
sent thousands to perdition. The murdered in hell, and the murderer in
heaven. The outrage and injustice of this is a formidable objection to
your proposition. Admit this is an extreme case; but I want to know how
you will dispose of it?

[A case much like this occurred in St. Louis soon after this was
written. A condemned murderer “believed,” and was marched from his cell
to the Olive Street church, and was there immersed, and then marched
to the gallows, _via_ the prison, and if Mr. Smith is right, thence to
heaven, while his victim likely was sent to hell.]

5. One sin may ruin a soul forever without immersion, but a million
sins are harmless if followed by immersion. To illustrate: a man
commits one sin, and dies without being immersed. You say, he cannot
be saved, for immersion is a condition of salvation. Another commits
a million of sins, and is immersed immediately after committing the
last one, and, having complied with the conditions of salvation, he
is saved. Can you see any equity in this? Even if it is possible for
a child, dying ere it attains the age of accountability to be saved,
suppose it lives to commit one sin, and dies without being immersed,
according to Mr. Smith, it cannot be saved. It sinned _once_ and died
without immersion, died with that sin unforgiven, and consequently it
cannot be saved.

6. A serious objection to Mr. Smith’s view of baptism, is its arbitrary
character. There is naturally no power in water, or immersion in water,
to cleanse the soul; and making its salvation depend on the body
being dipped in water, sets aside all natural and spiritual laws. All
God’s commands, in the New Testament, are based in sound philosophy,
and are in perfect harmony with all nature; nothing is arbitrary;
all is natural and philosophical. But the doctrine of salvation by
immersing the body in water, is in direct variance with God’s method of
government, and therefore must be false.

7. If Mr. Smith is right, a wonderful miracle is wrought whenever he or
his brethren immerse a man or woman in water. Mr. Campbell says, “I am
bold to affirm that every one of them who, in the belief of which the
apostle spoke, was immersed did, in the very instant in which he was
put under the water, receive the forgiveness of his sins.” (_Christian
Baptist_, pages 416, 417.) The believer is cursed with all his sins,
exposed to the wrath of God and the flames of hell, till the _very
instant he is put under water_. When under the water his sins are all
forgiven, his soul is purified, his nature is changed, God becomes his
friend, and the door of heaven is opened to him. All this takes place
during the brief time he is under the water. What a miracle! There
is nothing in the catalogue of miracles equal to it. And then such
wonderful miracles are being wrought day and night in every stream and
pond in the land. If there is any truth in this theory, Mr. Smith has
performed far more miracles than Jesus Christ ever did. His brethren
often laugh at the Methodists, for their notions about the operations
of the spirit, and tell them they suppose a miracle is wrought,
whenever a soul is converted; but Mr. Smith and his friends believe in
greater wonders than the Methodists do, and those too that are not half
as reasonable and philosophical.

8. This theory suspends salvation on the will and act of another man.
To illustrate: Mr. Smith convinces one of his hearers of the truth of
the gospel, and he makes application to be immersed that his sins may
be pardoned. Mr. Smith does not doubt his faith, but refuses to immerse
him--has an old grudge against him--and the man dies the next day,
dies unforgiven, and enters into the presence of his God with all his
sins on his soul. Now, Mr. Smith, by not doing his duty, has sent that
man to hell. It may be said, that Mr. Smith will be sent there too for
this sin of omission; but that would not help the poor man who went
there before him. If this doctrine is correct, thousands may be lost by
others refusing to immerse them. Again: a son or a daughter becomes a
penitent believer, and desires to be immersed, but the father forbids
it, and the youth dies unimmersed, and consequently goes to perdition.
It may be replied, that God does not require impossibilities, and in
those cases he will take the will for the deed. But Mr. Smith affirms,
there is no salvation without baptism. If Mr. Smith is right, all such
unfortunate persons are lost.

9. This system enjoins an impossibility, and then damns a man for not
performing it. On the desert a man becomes a penitent believer, but
dies ere he can reach water in which to be immersed. A traveler in
the arctic regions makes the good confession, but freezes to death
before he can melt water enough to be dipped in. All such souls are
lost, for Mr. Smith and Mr. Campbell tell us, there is no salvation on
the desert, nor in the polar regions, without immersion. And this is
called the glorious gospel of the blessed God! A solitary traveler in
an uninhabited region, exclaims from the heart, “I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God,” and wills to be immersed; but he is in a bad
fix. There is no one within an hundred miles to immerse him, and he
cannot immerse himself. He makes a desperate effort to find somebody to
immerse him, as the salvation of his soul depends on his success. But
his effort is fruitless, his exertion brings on a fever, and he dies
alone on the desert. According to Mr. Smith, he goes into the other
world a sinner, and as there is no water there to be immersed in, he
must be immersed in hell-fire, not for a moment, but for all eternity.

10. It encourages superstition by attaching an extravagant importance
to immersion. It elevates an ordinance far above every Christian
virtue; above faith, hope, charity, love. In fact, it makes almost a
god of water baptism.

11. Mr. Smith’s superstitious notions of baptism lead directly to
infant baptism--are the father and mother of infant baptism. Speaking
of the origin of infant baptism, the learned historian and critic,
Salmasins, says, “An opinion prevailed that no one could be saved
without being baptized, and for that reason the custom arose of
baptizing infants.” Professor Hahn testifies to the same: “Infant
baptism arose from false views of original sin, and of the magical
power of consecrated water.” (_Prof. Hahn’s Theology_, page 556.)
Another noted critic says: “The immediate occasion of infant baptism
it cannot be denied was its extravagant ideas of its necessity to
salvation.” (_Dressler’s Doctrine of the Sacrament of Baptism._)

It is evident, then, that Mr. Smith’s idea of water baptism is the
legitimate parent of infant baptism; and it is a mystery to me that
he and his brethren do not baptize infants to save their souls.
According to Mr. Campbell they need salvation. Hear him: “Our _nature_
was _corrupted_ by the fall of Adam before it was transmitted to us;
and hence the hereditary imbecility to do good, and that proneness to
do evil, so universally apparent in all human beings. All inherit a
_fallen_, consequently a _sinful_ nature.” (_Christian System_, pages
28, 29.) Now, as there is no salvation without baptism, why not baptize
infants? Will it not save _little_ sinners as well as large ones? It
would not astonish me to learn that Mr. Smith is immersing infants. I
wonder he has not been doing it these many years.

12. According to my friend’s theology, a man may be full of faith, and
love, and good works, but if he has not been immersed in water he is
in a lost and ruined condition, and on the broad road to everlasting
destruction. His faith, and love, and good works, avail nothing without
immersion. Stating such a proposition in simple language is enough to
condemn it.

13. This theory is worse than infidelity. Thomas Paine, the noted
infidel, says, “I believe that religious duties consist in doing
justice, loving mercy, and endeavoring to make our fellow creatures
happy.” (_Age of Reason_, page 6.) According to the theory in question,
our Creator has no respect for these religious duties, unless we are
immersed in water. He will neither bless us with salvation in time or
eternity, if we religiously perform all these duties, unless we are
immersed. With all due respect to my friend, I must say, that of the
two systems, Paine’s is the best, as far, at least, as religious duties
are concerned. My correspondent will doubtless reply, that he believes
in the duties Paine names, and urges his fellow men to observe them. No
doubt of it; but then he spoils his faith and exhortation, by telling
his hearers, that the observing of them will avail nothing in the way
of salvation without immersion in water.

14. This theory is worse than Calvinism. With all its cruelty and
savagism, it does not make our salvation depend on immersion in water,
whether there is any water to be immersed in or not, whether our health
will admit of immersion or not; whether we can find one qualified to
immerse or not, and whether if we find such an one he will accommodate
us or not.

15. We have not a particle of evidence that one of the twelve disciples
of our Lord was immersed. Matthew, one of the number, thus records
the call and acceptance of several of that chosen band. “And Jesus,
walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon and Peter, and
Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.
And he said unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.
And they straightway left their nets and followed him. And going on
from thence he saw two other brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and
John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their
nets; and he called them. And they immediately left the ship and their
father, and followed him.” Matt. iv. 18-22. In the tenth chapter we
are informed of the other disciples being called. There is not the
slightest intimation in the New Testament that one of the disciples was
immersed when they were chosen by the Master, or at any subsequent time.

16. My friend maintains, that immersion is the door to discipleship, to
the kingdom, to salvation, pardon, heaven. If he is right, is it not
remarkable that there is not a particle of evidence, that one of our
Lord’s disciples entered that door? When some of them were called, they
were on the shore of the sea, but not a word is recorded of their being
immersed to prepare them for their mission. Never afterward did they
speak or write of being immersed, nor did any others refer to it. The
unavoidable inference is, that they were not baptized in water, and so
according to Mr. Smith, their sins were never forgiven, they were not
saved, never members of the kingdom of God. But let Mr. Smith and his
friends ponder well the fact, that men in those days could be disciples
of Jesus without immersion. Why not now?

17. This theory is immoral in its influence, as it affirms that the
unimmersed are under no obligation to do any thing which implies
spiritual life. The following are Mr. Campbell’s remarkable words:
“No prayers, songs of praise, no acts of devotion in the new economy,
are enjoined on the unbaptized.” (_Christian Baptist_, page 439.) If
Mr. Campbell is right, it is a great sin for any one who has not been
immersed in water to perform any of these acts. Ministers, then, of all
denominations, except immersionists and their congregations, spend each
returning Sabbath, not in serving God, but in open rebellion against
him. Christians, all over the world, morning, noon and evening, in
offering their prayers to God, and singing his praise, are guilty of
heinous sins. They do what they have no right to do. Their prayers,
their songs, and all their devotions, are so many sins against heaven,
and for which, by and by, they will be turned into hell. Such teachings
can have no other than an immoral influence.

18. On page 204, of “Christian System,” Mr. Campbell has the following
curious remark: “And we know so much of human nature as to say, that
he that _imagines_ himself pardoned, will feel as _happy_ as he that
really is so.” This is in reply to an objection, that according to his
theory, no one can be saved, pardoned, without immersion in water. His
reply is, that there is no evidence such can be saved; but they can
_imagine_ themselves saved, pardoned; can _fool_ themselves into the
idea that they are pardoned, yet full of sin all the time, and will be
just as happy as they would be if their sins were all forgiven, and
their souls pure as the angels. Where he got his mental philosophy I
know not, but surely not from the Bible. According to this wisdom, a
man, drunk and wallowing in the gutter, if he imagines himself a sober
man and virtuous citizen, “will feel as happy as he that really is so.”
Or a murderer, with innocent blood on his hands, and murder in his
heart, if he only imagines he is innocent, “will feel as happy as he
that really is so.” All such absurd notions proceed from the position
of my friend, that there is no salvation, no forgiveness, without
immersion in water.

19. The Scriptures teach that all sin is to be forgiven. “All sins
shall be forgiven unto the sons of men.” “Every plant which my heavenly
Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.” The angel told Joseph,
“Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins.” Matt. i. 21. John, the forerunner of Jesus, pointed to him
and said, “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the
world.” John i. 29. Many more passages might be cited, showing that
all sin is to be forgiven, abolished, taken away, made an end of. Now,
my friend’s theory is, that no sin can be forgiven without the aid
of water baptism. But only a small portion of mankind are immersed,
and therefore, if he is right, all those scriptures which teach the
extinction of sin, are so many mistakes. If all sin is to be forgiven,
Mr. Smith is mistaken.

20. “And we have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son
to be the Savior of the world.” 1 John iv. 14. The men of Samaria,
after hearing Jesus speak of his mission, went away and said, “We
have heard him ourselves and know that this is the Christ, the Savior
of the world.” John iv. 42. If Christ was sent by the Father to save
the world, and if he saves only the few who are immersed in water,
instead of saving _the world_, he will save but a very _small part_ of
it; instead of doing his Father’s business, he will leave most of it
undone. How can you reconcile these precious promises with your very
partial salvation?

21. “Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this
world be cast out, and I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw
ALL MEN to me.” John xii. 31, 32. According to my friend, we can go to
Christ only _through immersion_, and as but a small part of all men are
immersed, the conclusion is, that only a small part of mankind can go
to Christ. But this conclusion from Mr. Smith’s premises contradicts
the Savior. Jesus says, he will draw all men to him. It is clear
that my friend’s theory contradicts the letter and spirit of the New
Testament.

22. “As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.” 1
Cor. xv. 22. When Jesus shall have made an end of sin, saved the world,
drawn all men to him, then will all who die in Adam be in Christ. But
Mr. Smith contends that no one can get into Christ, save by immersion.
That is a fundamental point with him; but as ultimately all men are
to be in Christ, he must be mistaken. Try, my friend, to reconcile
your faith with that glorious passage. Nearly all mankind die without
being water-immersed into Christ. All children, idiots, Jews, Pagans,
Catholics, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Methodists, Lutherans, Friend
Quakers, Unitarians, Universalists, and hosts of other Christians,
live and die without being immersed into Christ, and it follows from
your proposition, they never can be in Christ; never can be saved from
their sins. None of these, you assert, have their sins forgiven in this
world. Pray, tell what will become of us all? You have evaded this
question long enough. I have urged you to let us sinners know what is
to be our fate beyond the grave. We know what is the condition of all
these classes in this world, according to Mr. Smith’s theory--they are
all sinners, all condemned, all out of Christ, all out of the kingdom,
children of the devil, without God and without hope in the world. Now,
it surely is not impertinent to insist that Mr. Smith tell us, plainly
and without equivocation, what is to be the doom of these countless
millions beyond the grave. I charge his system with involving the
endless sinfulness and wretchedness of all these multitudes of Adam’s
race. If I am mistaken, let him show wherein I am. Let us have no more
of this dodging. It looks bad, very bad, on the part of my friend, to
evade this point as he has done.

23. The apostle Paul writes, “Christ sent me not to baptize, but
to preach the gospel.” 1 Cor. i. 17. This is surely a remarkable
declaration, if water baptism is a soul-saving institution. If he
had believed that water baptism is a condition of salvation, would
he have said he was not sent to baptize? According to Mr. Smith’s
understanding, where Paul speaks about “obeying the gospel,” he means
baptism. If Mr. Smith is right, Paul was not sent to induce men to
obey the gospel. Again: Paul labored for the conversion of souls, and
Mr. Smith says, conversion is baptism. Then the apostle was not sent
to be instrumental in converting men. If the gentleman is correct,
the great apostle was not sent to labor for men’s salvation, or their
conversion, or to induce them to obey the gospel. This all follows, if
water baptism is a condition of salvation, for Paul declares, that he
was not sent to baptize; that is, was not sent to do the very thing
that must be done to insure salvation. This declaration of the apostle,
that he was not sent to baptize, is a perfect refutation of Mr. Smith’s
proposition, that water baptism is a condition of salvation.

24. In looking over Mr. Campbell’s “Christian System,” page 60, I find
the following wonderous things, said to be consummated by dipping a
man or woman in water: “The change which is consummated by immersion,
is sometimes called in sacred style, ‘being quickened,’ ‘made alive,’
‘passed from death to life,’ ‘being born again,’ ‘having risen with
Christ,’ ‘turning to the Lord,’ ‘being enlightened,’ ‘conversion,’
‘reconciliation,’ ‘repentance unto life.’” In another place, he asserts
the subject comes out of the water as “pure as an angel.” But mark, no
one can be thus purified, quickened, made alive, etc., without water
baptism, and yet, St. Paul says, he was not sent to baptize. If that
apostle believed in baptism, as Mr. Smith does, would he have made
that remark?

25. Mr. Campbell again says, “Baptism is _designed_ to introduce the
subjects of it into the participation of the blessings of the death and
resurrection of Christ.” “To the believing penitent, it is the means
of receiving a formal, distinct, and specific absolution, or release
from guilt.” (page 58.) Baptism is THE MEANS by which God _designs_ to
confer all these immortal and heavenly blessings on men, and yet one of
his greatest apostles declares, he was not sent to baptize; that is,
was not sent to use _the means_ by which alone men can participate in
these blessings.

26. Hear Mr. Campbell again: “The converts made to Christ, by the
apostles, were taught to consider themselves pardoned, justified,
sanctified, reconciled, adopted, saved.” (page 187.) He then devotes
several pages to show that the _immersed_ only are in this condition,
or state. Only those who submit to the _act_, as he terms it, of
immersion, are in this new and changed condition, and yet the chief of
the apostles tells the world, he was not sent to baptize; that is, was
not sent to do _the act_ which alone can put men into a saved state or
condition.




CHAPTER XVIII.


  DISCUSSION IN PONTIAC--THE APOSTLE’S FAITH--HIS ARGUMENT IN
  ROMANS--EXTENSIVE TRAVELING--IN KANSAS AND MISSOURI--PRICE’S RAID--IN
  OHIO AND INDIANA--DARK NIGHT AND WALK IN TOLEDO--CONVERSATION ON
  DESTRUCTIONISM--THE VICTORY--THE DEATH--PRESIDENT LINCOLN--DEBATE IN
  MILFORD, OHIO--THE RESTITUTION AN OLD DOCTRINE--THE SENTIMENT WIDE
  SPREAD--AT WORK IN IOWA--LABORERS THERE--MURDERERS SAVED AND THE
  MURDERED LOST--INTELLECTUAL AND MORAL GROWTH--WHAT MAN WAS--WHAT HE
  IS TO BE--THE VICTORY--SPIRITUALISM--IMMORAL PREACHING--SAVED WITHOUT
  REPENTANCE--PREACHING A MEANS OF SALVATION--A METHODIST MINISTER
  BELIEVES--THE SUICIDE.

In the spring of 1861, I resolved to move to Chicago, and publish
the _Magazine_, in that city. The war was still raging, and I was
apprehensive it would linger several years longer. I could do nothing
in Missouri, and most of my subscribers were nearer Chicago than St.
Louis. Accordingly, in May of said year, we bid adieu to the city
which had been our home for many years, and took up our abode in the
“Garden City” of the West. I had been there but once since 1840, and
what a change had taken place! Its population at the present time, is
about two hundred thousand, but in 1840 it did not number more than
six thousand inhabitants. And it will doubtless continue to make rapid
strides in its onward march. Its lake navigation almost connecting it
with the Atlantic ocean; its railroads extending in all directions
through the most productive agricultural region of the world, must
concentrate immense wealth and business in Chicago.

Our denomination has two church edifices in Chicago, and two large
societies. Dr. W. H. Ryder is pastor of the first society, and T. E.
St. John of the second. Till recently, J. H. Tuttle had charge of
the second society. There is also a denominational paper there--_The
New Covenant_--published by D. P. Livermore. It has, I understand, an
extensive circulation.

There are far more of the liberal faith in this northern region than
as far south as St. Louis. A large portion of the people are from
the Eastern States, and they brought with them rational views of the
Bible and religion. We have meeting-houses and societies all over this
northern section, also ministers at work instructing the people, and
uniting and concentrating their efforts.

Soon after moving to Chicago, I had an oral discussion in Pontiac,
Ill., with Elder Brooks, on Endless Misery and Universal Salvation. In
one of my speeches, I remarked:

The apostle Paul was certainly a believer in the salvation of all
men. Some of his statements of this doctrine are remarkably lucid,
comprehensive, and weighty. Take, for instance, the fifth chapter to
the Romans.

1. In the eighteenth verse he says: “Therefore, as by the offence
of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so, by
the righteousness of one the _free gift_ came upon _all men_ unto
justification of life.” What is this “free _gift_” to all men? Answer:
“For the wages of sin is death; but the _gift of God is eternal life_.”
Rom. vi. 23. Eternal life, then, is given, made sure, to _all men_. Not
to one here and there; to this sect or that sect; this nation or that
nation; but to ALL MEN. Let this be remembered.

2. In the next verse of said chapter, he continues: “For as by one
man’s disobedience, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous.” By “many” here he means the same as by
“all men,” in the preceding verse, the terms being varied to avoid
tautology. Parkhurst, in his Greek Lexicon says, “The word _many_ in
this verse, signifies _the many_; that is, the _mass_, the multitude;
the _whole bulk_ of mankind.” Dr. Macknight, a Presbyterian critic,
writes, “For as the word _many_ in the first part of the verse, does
not mean some part of mankind only, but _all mankind_, from first to
last, who without exception are constituted sinners; so _the many_, in
the latter part of the verse, who are said to be constituted righteous
through the obedience of Christ, must mean _all mankind_, from the
beginning to the end of the world, _without exception_.” The statement
of the apostle is this--all mankind are sinners, and all mankind shall
be righteous. Can universal salvation be expressed in clearer terms?

3. He continues his argument: “Where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound; and as sin hath reigned unto death, even so, might grace reign
through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.”
Verses 20, 21. Sin abounds universally, but grace is much more to
abound. The grace of God is not only to banish sin from every soul, but
to bless every soul forever and ever. But how can grace abound more
than sin, if millions of mankind are to be victims of sin eternally?
Will the grace of God, resulting in eternal life, abound in such
souls? A valuable building is on fire; the fire abounds in every part
from base to attic. The engines rush to the spot and pour water all
over the building, and extinguish the devouring flames. In this case
where fire abounded, water much more abounds. But if the water failed
to extinguish the fire in one half of the building, would water have
abounded more than fire? So, if the grace of God puts out the fires of
sin in only half of the universe, will grace abound more than sin? How
is that, Elder Brooks?

4. The whole creation to be delivered. “For the creature was made
subject to vanity, not willingly but by reason of him who hath
subjected the same in hope; because the creature itself shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of
the children of God.” Rom. viii. 20, 21. The word, “creature,” here
means mankind; the Greek whence it is taken, is rendered “creation” in
the twenty-second verse. The words, “every creature,” in the commission
of Christ to his apostles, are from the same term. “Go ye into all
the world and preach the gospel to _every creature_.” Mark xvi. 15.
Dr. Macknight and other good critics tell us, that the word rendered,
_creature_, signifies, “_every human creature_; ALL MANKIND.” Dr.
Thomas White, an English divine of the Episcopal Church, translates the
text thus: “For THE CREATION was made subject to vanity, not willingly,
but by reason of him who hath subjected it; in hope that THE CREATION
ITSELF also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God.” Mankind, then, are to be
delivered from corruption--from moral and physical corruption--into
the glorious liberty of the children of God. The apostle says, this
universal deliverance SHALL be effected, and I believe him.

5. God will have mercy on all. “For I would not, brethren, that ye
should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your
own conceits; that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fulness of the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall be saved;
as it is written, There shall come out Sion the Deliverer, and shall
turn away ungodliness from Jacob: for this is my covenant unto them,
when I shall take away their sins. As concerning the gospel, they are
enemies for your sakes: but as touching the election, they are beloved
for the fathers’ sakes. For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have
now obtained mercy through their unbelief: even so have these also now
not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy. For
God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? For
who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?
Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto
him again? For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things;
to whom be glory for ever. Amen.” Rom. xi. 25-36. Jews and Gentiles
include all mankind. The apostles tell us, that the blindness of the
Jews is to continue “Till the _fulness_ of the Gentiles be come in,”
and then “_All Israel_ shall be saved.” “For God hath concluded them
_all_--Israelites and Gentiles--in unbelief that he might have mercy
on _all_.” And then he adds, “For of him, and through him, and to him
are _all things_, to whom be glory forever. Amen.” No terms can express
more forcibly the proposition I affirm on this occasion.

In the next verse, the apostle adds, “I beseech you therefore by the
_mercies_ of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable duty.” In the previous
part of his letter to the Romans, as I have shown, he writes of the
_mercies_ of God for mankind. 1. “The free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life.” 2. “Many,” that is, the mass, all mankind,
“shall be made righteous.” 3. “Where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound.” 4. The whole creation shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption. 5. God will bring all the Gentiles, and all the Jews, into
the kingdom; will “HAVE MERCY ON ALL; for of him and through him, and
to him are ALL THINGS.” His next words are, “I beseech you therefore
by the MERCIES of God,” etc. It is sometimes said by the opposers of
Universal Grace, that it has an immoral influence. But the great
apostle beseeches men in consideration of its truth, to live holy,
godly lives. He does not say, as some have profanely said, “If God’s
mercy will save the world, we have nothing to do; let us then eat,
drink and be merry; lie, steal, and murder. It is all right; God will
save us any how.” Let every believer in the universal mercy of God aim
to live a life “holy and acceptable to God,” which is his reasonable
duty.

These are the statements of the apostle to the Gentiles concerning
the extent of salvation; and I, and no other one, can employ language
expressing more clearly the Universalist faith. That gifted man was
certainly a believer in the “Restitution of all things.”

Since I have been in Chicago, I have traveled and lectured on nearly
all the railroads running out of the city; have labored not only in
Illinois, but in Indiana, Ohio, Iowa, Missouri and Kansas. I was at
work in Kansas and Missouri when Price made his late raid into the
latter state. That was in the fall of 1864. Was in Leavenworth when the
state militia were called out to resist the invaders. The people of
Kansas expected no mercy at their hands should they enter the state;
Leavenworth, especially, would be sure to feel their wrath. The streets
of the city were guarded, and orders issued, to arrest every straggler
who was without a pass. Cannon were mounted on the surrounding hills,
and every man who could shoulder a musket was required to report for
duty. I was tempted to go, armed and equipped, to the “front,” but
recollecting I had not fired a gun for twenty years, I concluded I
could not do much execution, and so set my face homeward. But how to
get across the river into Missouri, was the question, as no one was
allowed to go over without a pass, and I had no pass, and probably
could not get one. I, however, rode boldly to the ferry as if I was
on important business, and was passed over without being questioned.
But when near Weston, I was stopped by the picket; but the officer of
the day soon coming along, took me to head-quarters, where I obtained
a pass to St. Joseph. Leaving my horse with a kind friend, I went to
St. Joseph by rail, and thence to the Mississippi river, two hundred
miles across the state. Considerable portion of the way being infested
with bushwackers, there were thirty soldiers on the train to protect
us from those bloody scoundrels. The guards fired on two horsemen,
who seemed to be fleeing from the rushing train. Both fell, and as I
learned afterward, they were killed, and were Union men. The conductor
thought they were bushwackers, and that class of fighters were shot
down like mad dogs, as they deserved to be. Only a few days before,
and a few miles from that spot, Bill Anderson’s bloody crew stopped a
train, and murdered in cold blood twenty-one of the passengers. All
armed stragglers on the prairies, were suspiciously regarded in that
locality, after that terrible crime was perpetrated. Macon City was
alive with business, fifteen hundred soldiers being there digging
ditches, throwing up breastworks, and making every other necessary
preparation to resist an attack, which was daily expected. I went to
St. Louis, and found the citizens very indignant at the way General
Rosecrans was managing affairs. Half of a general, with the force at
Rosecrans’ command, would have driven Price out of the state at the
beginning of the invasion, when he was yet in the south-east corner of
it. But Rosecrans’ head being full of whisky and popery, he let the
rebels do about as they pleased. They overran the best portion of the
state, and did an immense amount of harm.

I spent three weeks, in the business of my life, between Chicago and
Toledo, Ohio. Lectured in many places I had not before visited, and
much extended my acquaintance. Had an appointment in East Toledo, a
suburb of Toledo, and about three miles from it. It was a dismal
night, and the road out there was a dismal road. I started after dark,
on foot and alone, to fill the appointment. The weather was cold, the
night dark, and the rain pouring down in torrents. There being no
sidewalk, and the mud deep, I had an interesting walk. Arriving at
the meeting-house, I found it dark, and the door locked; and after
shivering in the wet and cold outside one hour, and not a soul joining
me, I returned whence I came. I suppose no one expected I would be
on hand such a night. The next day on the cars, I had the following
conversation with a fellow passenger:

“I do not believe in eternal punishment. I believe God will _destroy_
the wicked, soul and body, root and branch.”

“When will he do all this?”

“At the resurrection. Then God will raise saint and sinner, take the
righteous to himself, and burn the wicked to ashes.”

“I congratulate you on the improvement you have made on old Orthodoxy.
It is certainly better to burn sinners up, then burn them eternally.”

“I do not believe any one in this world has a spark of immortality in
him. We are born mortal, live mortal, and unless we comply with certain
conditions, we never can be immortal. Immortality is conditional, and
unless we comply with those conditions, we shall be consumed in the
conflagration.”

“What are those conditions?”

“Faith in Christ, is one of them.”

“Will all be destroyed except those who exercise faith in Christ? Is
that your theory?”

“Yes.”

“Then nearly all mankind will be burned up. The countless millions who
lived before Christ’s advent--the good and the bad--all consumed in one
pile. All the Pagans, Mohammedans, and Jews who have lived since his
birth will share the same fiery fate. All idiots, all children who
have died such, will be consumed with them. Your creed is the gospel of
destruction, almost universal destruction.”

“I did not say all them would be destroyed.”

“I admit you did not say so in so many words, but no other inference
can be drawn from your position. You said no one would be blessed with
immortality and eternal life, who did not have faith in Christ in this
world. The child, the idiot, the Pagan, the Mohammedan, all lack such a
faith here, and the inference is, they will all be destroyed. You are
ashamed to admit in so many words such a horrid idea to me, but that is
your faith.”

“You do not understand me, and you cannot convince the people of the
White House that all will be saved.”

“I understand you and your fiery faith perfectly well. It is worse
than Atheism, for it asserts that death is the end of man, while your
creed asserts, that nearly all mankind will be raised from the dead on
_purpose to burn them up_. Atheism is a hundred fold better than your
theory. It is amazing to me, that a man with the Bible in his hands,
and God all round him, can entertain such a terrible theory. You have
eyes, but you see not; ears, but you hear not; understanding, but
understand not. Read the words of truth emblazoned on God’s word and
works, accept their teachings, and abandon your fiery creed, your worse
than atheistical dogma.”

Spent one month on the Illinois Central railroad, and went south as far
as Du Quoin, about three hundred miles, and lectured in most of the
important towns, on and near the road. When in Mattoon and Charleston,
the glorious news arrived of the evacuation of Richmond, and the
surrender of Lee. Up went the banners, and loud were the hosannas.
Every body were in the street, shaking hands, and with smiling faces.
The terrible war was over, the government was triumphantly sustained,
and the soldier boys would soon return. No wonder the people were happy.

I was in Ashley, April 14th. Some one said, “Have you heard the news?”
“What news?” “Mr. Lincoln was murdered last night!” “It cannot be so,”
I replied; “it is doubtless a false report?” But in a few moments,
the passenger train came down with its engine draped in black. That
confirmed the heart-rending report. As the train approached the depot
no one spoke--no one could speak. The people turned homeward with
meditative steps and down cast look. All over the land, from the
Atlantic to the Pacific, in city and country, where the sad tidings
was conveyed, the people were struck dumb. Mr. Lincoln’s character had
been tested by the most difficult circumstances, and he had proved
himself to be a wise, noble, far-seeing man. Every body had confidence
in him--in his judgment, his uprightness, his patriotism. He was deemed
the Savior of his country. No wonder the people were “stricken, smitten
and afflicted.” And then, the awful news was so different from what the
people had just been feasting on. This was victory, victory, victory.
The enemy was subdued, and the country saved. That was death, death,
death. The great, the good, the beloved President, was murdered, and
that, too, in the very hour of his triumph.

I was at Du Quoin the next day; and it was reported of three men in
town, that they had said, “Lincoln was served right,” and forthwith
some soldiers, who were at home on a furlough, started post-haste,
and brought them into town. They would have been hung, if it had been
proved they dropped those obnoxious words.

I had a discussion in Milford, Ohio, with John Sweeney of Chicago,
which continued four days. He was pretty well posted on doctrinal
points, and did some good work for his cause. The discussion was
conducted pleasantly, and I trust profitably to the hearers. He said,
that the idea of the salvation of all men was new in the world; had
been entertained but a few years. In my reply I remarked:

The gentleman greatly errs in asserting that the idea of the final
purification and salvation of all souls, is a new thought in this
world. The apostle Peter informs us, that the “Restitution of all
things was spoken by the mouth of all God’s holy prophets since the
world began.” Acts iii. 21. It is as old, then, as inspiration, as
revelation. And far back in the depths of the past, hundreds of years
before Christ, and outside of the Jewish nation, the “Restitution of
all things” was cherished by many of the wise and good. Upper India
was doubtless one of the first abodes of mankind after the flood, Noah
or some of his children, having settled there. In the sacred books of
the early inhabitants of that country, the redemption of all souls is
distinctly stated. Budhism, a sort of Protestant Reformation of the old
faith of the people, avows the same destiny for mankind. Padmahani,
the Son of the Supreme God, made a vow not to return to heaven until
all beings should be brought through him to salvation. True, they
were to pass through many terrible hells--first, a hell of snakes,
then came thirty-two principal hells, and then one hundred and twenty
minor hells. The road to heaven, according to that old theology, was
certainly hard to travel; but I suppose one had better go to heaven
through all those hells than not get there at all. The author of the
“Friend of India,” gives the following as the views of many of the
present inhabitants of that country. “According to the Brahmos, God is
a loving Father, and men are his children; to secure happiness, men
must avoid sin and subdue the sins to which they are prone. They must
fulfil all human duty, and especially devote themselves to works of
benevolence among the ignorant and poor. For the wrong they do, they
will suffer punishment; _but their sufferings are remedial, and will
purify the soul from all its errors_. Meditation and prayer are to be
employed for the same end; and to assist their followers in this duty,
a little book has been published, which is extensively used.”

In Egypt, the land of ancient wisdom, many of the priests, Dr.
Enfield thinks, entertained a belief in the salvation of all men. See
his “History of Philosophy,” Book I, chapter 8. In the old Persian
mythology, the same idea is contained. It has a God and a Savior; and
the latter will finally restore all from the power of satan.

For three or four hundred years after Christ, many of the leading
Christian writers were believers in the “Restitution of all things.”
Says Clement, President of the theological school in Alexandria,
the most noted school of the second and third centuries: “How is he
a Savior and Lord, unless he is the Savior and Lord of all? He is
certainly the Savior of those who have believed: and of those who have
not believed he is the Lord, until by being brought to confess him they
shall receive the proper and well-adapted blessing for themselves.”
“The Lord is the propitiation not only for our sins, that is, of the
faithful, but also for the whole world; therefore he indeed _saves
all_, but converts some by punishments, and others by gaining their
free-will, so that he has the high honor that unto him _every knee
should bow_, of things in heaven, on earth, and under the earth; that
is, angels, men, and the souls of those who died before his advent.”

Clement’s great pupil, Origen, was a noted advocate of Universal
Salvation. He says: “We assert that the Word who is the wisdom of God,
shall bring together _all intelligent creatures_, and convert them into
his own perfection, through the instrumentalities of their free-will
and their own exertions. And the consummation of all things will be
the extinction _of sin_; but whether it shall then be so abolished as
never to revive again in the universe does not belong to the present
discourse to show. What relates, however, to the entire abolition of
sin and the _reformation of every soul_, may be obscurely traced in
many of the prophecies; for there we discover that the name of God is
to be invoked by all, so that _all_ shall serve him with one consent,
that the reproach of contumely is to be taken away, and that there
is to be _no more sin_, nor vain words, nor treacherous tongue. This
may not indeed take place with mankind in the present life, but be
accomplished after they shall have been liberated from the body.”

A century later, Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, advocated the same faith
in the plainest terms: “What therefore is the scope of St. Paul’s
dissertation in this place? That the nature of evil shall at last be
_wholly exterminated_, and divine, immortal goodness embrace within
itself _every rational creature_; so that of _all_ who were made by
God, _not one_ shall be excluded from his kingdom.”

Diodorus, Bishop of Tarsus, in Silicia, A.D. 378, was of that faith.
“The wicked,” he says, “are to suffer, not eternal torment, but a
punishment proportioned in length to the amount of their guilt; after
which, they are to be happy without end.” About the same time, lived
Fabius Manus Victorinus. He maintained, that “Christ will regenerate
all things; through him all things will be purged, and return to
eternal life.”

Other learned, good, and influential men in those early days, believed
in and taught this truth. I will name Titus, Bishop of Bostia; Basil
the Great, Bishop of Cæsarea; Didymus the Blind, and the learned
and powerful Jerome. In fact, most of the Christians, Orthodox and
anti-Orthodox, in the first age of the Christian Era, entertained this
faith. The writers of those times speak of this faith as if it was not
questioned; they offer no labored argument in its defence, and when
they do refer to it, it is only incidentally. But darkness was rapidly
covering the earth, and gross darkness the people. The enlightened
and benevolent doctrine of the Restitution was not adapted to the
savagism of the dark ages that was then threatening the world, and so
in the year of our Lord 553, at Constantinople, by the Fifth Ecumenical
Council, it was condemned. From that period till the Reformation of
the fourteenth century, the religions of the world corresponded with
the ignorance and brutality that prevailed. Our wise, benevolent, and
pure faith, not harmonizing with the savagism of the times, had but
few adherents. But in the great religious awakening of the fourteenth
century, it was again entertained, and has been ever since gradually
gaining in favor.

In A.D. 1650, Gerard Winstonley, an Englishman, in a book called,
“Mystery of God,” thus writes, “The whole creation of mankind shall be
delivered from corruption, bondage, death, and pain.” He was persecuted
for his faith, and thrown into prison. At the same time lived and
labored William Earbury, an eminent preacher among the Independents.
He was a defender of the same faith. He asked, “What gospel, what glad
tidings is it to tell the world, that none can be saved but the elect
and believers? Christ came to save only the _lost_, giving the word
of life to _all men_, that they might believe, a shutting all up in
unbelief, that he might have mercy on _all_.” “For the ministry of God
shall be finished, fully known, and the angel swears by God, that time
shall be no more; for _all_ shall be taken up into eternity, unto God
himself, and God shall be _all in all_.” (_Terror of Tythes_, pages
175, 244.)

Another noble defender of the Restitution in those times, was Richard
Coppin. He was charged with blasphemy for believing in Universal
Salvation, and he replied, “Whatever is the will of God is not
blasphemy to affirm. The will of God is the salvation of all men,
therefore to say that _all men shall be saved_ is not blasphemy.”
(_Truth’s Triumph_, page 7.) He confounded his opposers in discussion,
and that so enraged them, they had him imprisoned. This took place in
1656. At this time a book by an unknown author appeared, with this
title: “Of the Torments of Hell; The Foundation; And the Pillars
Thereof Discovered, Searched, Shaken and Ruined. With infallible proof
that there is not to be punishment for the wicked after this life; for
any to endure that shall not end.” The author was certainly a man of
ability, and much reading. He gives Orthodoxy some pretty hard hits.
This was written over two hundred years ago.

At the same time lived Jeremy White, a chaplain to Protector Cromwell.
He published a book called, “The Restitution of All Things: or, a
vindication of the goodness and grace of God, to be manifested at last
in the recovery of the whole creation out of their fall.” He was truly
a christian man; his soul was imbued with the spirit of his faith.
Dr. Thomas Burnet of that age, was of like faith, and Lord Macauley,
in his “History of England,” says he was a “clergyman of eminent
genius, learning and virtue.” In one of his works he writes, “I know
not by what means it happens at present, that some divines of a cruel
and fiery temper are extremely pleased with eternal and infinite
punishment, and can hardly endure to have the point fairly examined and
debated on both sides.” There are some of that kind in the world now.

William Whiston, the well known translator of Josephus, was an
unbeliever in endless misery. He wrote a book entitled, “The Eternity
of Hell Torments Considered.” Archbishop Hare says, he was “a
fair, unblemished character; all his life he cultivated piety,
virtue and good bearing.” He succeeded Sir Isaac Newton as Professor
of Mathematics, at Cambridge. In his book he offers some cogent
arguments against eternal woe, but I have not time to state them on
this occasion. R. Roach, another English clergyman, who flourished
over an hundred years ago, say, “Then will the general redemption be
accomplished, and the mediating office of the great High Priest be
at an end, for he will then deliver up the kingdom thus completed to
his Father, that ‘God may be _all in all_.’” Bishop Warburton, the
celebrated author of the “Divine Legation of Moses,” had no faith
in ceaseless woe. He justly calls the preachers of that doctrine,
“unmerciful doctors,” “merciless doctors.”

But I have not time to cite any more English testimony, that the
doctrines of the Restitution have been long entertained by many of the
purest, best, and most learned of that nation. I will cross over into
Germany, and see if these sentiments have not been entertained in that
enlightened land.

As early as 1590, Samuel Huber, Professor of Divinity, in Wittemburg,
was a believer in the Restitution, according to Spauheim, Professor of
Divinity at Geneva: “We think,” says the latter, “the opinion of Huber
on this subject absurd, who about the close of the last century, began
to publish and defend a universal election of all men in Christ to
salvation.” At the same early day our righteous faith had a talented,
learned and pious advocate in John William Petersen. He was Professor
of Poetry at Rostock, in 1677. He was also superintendent at Lubic and
Lunenburg, and court preacher at Lutin. In 1700, he published a work
in three volumes, in defense of the Restitution, which was extensively
read, and caused much excitement in Germany.

At the same time was published a book which has been widely circulated
and extensively read. It is entitled, “The Everlasting Gospel,” by Paul
Seigvolk. It clearly and forcibly advocates the salvation of mankind.
It was very popular in Germany, and has been republished at various
times in different parts of Europe. It was also published in this
country as early as 1753. That our divine faith was widely diffused
in those days, we learn from many other sources. In the _Analytical
Review_, an English periodical published in 1780, we find the following:

“The doctrine of the final happiness of mankind, which present the
prospect of the termination of all evil, and of a period in which the
deep shades of misery and guilt, which have so long enveloped the
universe, shall be forever dispelled, is so pleasing a speculation
to a benevolent mind, that we do not wonder it meets with so _many_
advocates. From the _earliest_ period, we doubt not the belief of it
has been secretly entertained by many, who, in the face of opposition
and danger, had not the resolution to avow it. Now, however, it has
broken through _every_ restriction, and walks abroad in every form that
is adapted to convince the philosophic, to arouse the unthinking, and
to melt the tender.”

These books, and others of like character, were extensively circulated
in Germany, and called the attention of the public to the benevolent
faith advocated with so much learning and piety. An exciting
controversy was the result; and learned men on both sides put forth all
their strength for and against this controverted doctrine.

But I have not time to say more about the history of Universalism
in Germany. Ever since the Reformation, that faith has been gaining
adherents, and at the present time, it is almost universally
entertained by the Protestants of that country. Says Dr. Dwight, in
“Travels in North Germany,” “The doctrine of endless punishment is
almost universally rejected. I have seen but one person who believed
it.” Not only in Germany and England, but in Holland, Switzerland,
France, Scotland, and in other parts of Europe, the doctrine of
Universal Salvation prevailed at an early day, and at the present
time is widely diffused. It exists more or less in all the Protestant
denominations. There is no sect in Europe called Universalist, but the
sentiment is found in all sects, and encounters very little opposition.

I also spent three weeks in the north part of Iowa. Lectured in Lyons,
Marshalltown, Newton, Iowa City, Washington, and in many other places.
T. C. Eaton, who resides in Des Moines, has labored very successfully
in the interior of that state. He has long been in the West--has
resided in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, as well as in Iowa--and wherever he
has lived, has always been a faithful laborer in the Master’s vineyard.
J. P. Sanford, is in Marshalltown, and is an eloquent speaker, and
laborious worker. Some fifteen years since, I was introduced to him in
Bentonsport, Iowa. He was then a Methodist, and asked many questions
concerning the liberal faith. Six months afterward he commenced
preaching, and has been in the ministry ever since. He was in the
army two years during the late rebellion, and was captain, colonel,
chaplain. He has traveled some in Europe, and, it is said, delivers
some interesting lectures concerning “the old country.” He is also a
noted masonic lecturer. In Newton met A. C. Edmonds, who resides and
preaches in the place. He has spent several years in California and
Oregon, traveling and preaching; has also published a denominational
paper in those states. Our people have a meeting-house, also a society,
in Newton. In Iowa City, the Universalists own a church edifice, and J.
Kinney is pastor of the society. He is an excellent man, and the good
cause prospers under his ministry.

I have labored in Iowa, more or less, most every year, for a long time,
and until lately my journeys were made on horseback. In this way I have
traveled over about two thirds of the state. Iowa abounds in good soil,
and will, in a few years, be a rich and populous country. Now is the
time to establish our beautiful faith in that young and vigorous state.
It will improve the people spiritually and morally, while they are
making themselves pleasant homes, and developing the resources of the
land. Said a man to me in Marshalltown:

“Do you think the assassin Booth can be saved?”

“Jesus said, ‘I came to seek and save the lost.’ ‘They that are whole
need not a physician, but they that are sick.’ And the apostle Paul
teaches, that Christ came to save the chief of sinners. As it was the
mission of our Savior to save the lost, the morally sick, the chief
of sinners, I dare not say, that even Booth cannot be saved. But if
Orthodoxy is true, I had rather have Booth’s chances for heaven than
Mr. Lincoln’s. The latter received his death wound without a moment’s
warning, and was not conscious an instant after the fatal bullet struck
his head. He belonged to no church, was not a professor of religion;
and so according to Orthodoxy, died impenitent, unregenerated, a
sinner, and must be lost eternally. But Booth lived one or two hours
after he was wounded, and was perfectly conscious to the last moment
of his life. And who knows but he repented of his great crime before
he expired? And if he did, according to Orthodoxy, he went straight
to heaven. But if there is any truth in Orthodoxy, Mr. Lincoln had
no chance whatever, for he died ‘impenitent.’ If Partialism is true,
as a general rule, murderers are saved, while the murdered are lost,
for in nine cases of every ten, the latter, being killed suddenly,
without any intimation of their doom, and so have not time to say
‘Lord save me,’ are eternally lost; while the former, the murderers,
having timely warning of their fate, and special effort being made for
their regeneration, almost invariably swing from the gallows soundly
converted, and so go from the gibbet to immortal glory. It takes
Orthodoxy to translate the bloody criminal into a saint, and fit him
for heaven between his monstrous crime and the halter; but Universalism
is required to save the murdered, the victim of his iniquity. While
I was residing in St. Louis, a wretch by the name of Lamb, held with
his own hands, his young and confiding wife in the Mississippi river,
till she was dead. He was arrested, confessed his guilt, and was hung;
and on the gallows said, ‘I have a hope within me that bears me up--a
hope that I shall live with God, and be happy with him, and that I
shall sing his praise. I die with a trust in God.’ And Dr. Anderson,
a Presbyterian, his spiritual adviser, published in the papers that
he was ‘satisfied of the reality of Lamb’s penitence.’ Behold the
abominations of Orthodoxy! That woman belonged to no church, had not
‘got religion,’ and so was banished from the murderer’s hands to the
devil, to be the victim of his diabolical cruelty eternally. But the
incarnate fiend, whom the law called her husband, was transported a few
months afterward, from the gallows to the third heaven, according to
Orthodoxy.”

In one of my sermons in Washington, I spoke as follows:

As man is susceptible of physical improvement, is he not also of
intellectual and moral? Cannot the soul develop, grow, as well as the
body? What a vast difference there is between the infant mind and
that mind which has devoted years to intellectual and moral culture?
The soul is a germ; and as the germ in the seed, under favorable
circumstances, will bud, blossom, and yield a rich harvest, so this
spiritual germ, if no obstructions interdict, will develop its heavenly
proportions to perfect manhood. The race, like each individual, has
its childhood, its youth, and perfect manhood. One individual is a
representative of the race. As one progresses the rest may. Suppose
every human being who walks the earth for five hundred years, should
make intellectual and moral improvement, the great end and aim of his
life, all other pursuits subordinate to that one, what would be the
consequence? Would not Americans and Europeans, at the expiration of
that time, be as far in advance of their present condition as they are
now in advance of the New Hollanders, Hottentots, and inhabitants of
the South Sea Islands? Undoubtedly they would. The whole race would
then be in the kingdom of God. Sin would no longer be nurtured on
earth. There would be no soil for it to grow in. The long hoped for,
and prayed for, Millenium would be ushered in--all would know the Lord
from the least to the greatest--the lion and the lamb would lie down
together. This glorious era is predicted by Holy Writ, and God’s elder
Scriptures. Revelation and nature unite in testifying that mankind,
God’s noblest and best work, and for whom the universe was made, are
susceptible of infinite improvement, that they will shine brighter and
brighter to the perfect day.

It may require more than five centuries to produce such results; it
probably will; but eternity is before us. Our race is in its dawn only.
The morning twilight has just appeared. The darkness of barbarism
still lingers in the horizon. The chains of intellectual and moral
despotism are still clanking in our midst. But the race, as well as
the individual, will reach noon-day. The sun of righteousness will
mount the zenith, and disperse all darkness and melt all chains.
Such characters as Moses, Homer, Plato, Lord Bacon, Shakspeare,
Newton, Napoleon, Franklin, Washington, Jefferson, Clay, Webster,
Beecher, Chapin, and a multitude of others in INTELLECT; and such as
Socrates, St. John, St. Paul, Melancthon, Howard, Channing, Oberlin,
Speer, and others too numerous to mention, in MORAL WORTH, indicate
the intellectual and moral heights all may ultimately attain. They
stand out in bold relief from the mass of mankind, indicating the
capabilities of human nature. They are pioneers in the intellectual and
moral field, and the ground they occupy will ere long be occupied by
all. They are beacons on the rushing stream of life to pilot humanity
into the celestial haven.

The history of the earth and all therein and thereon, as revealed by
science and history, illustrates the law of progress. This earth has
been a theater of life for innumerable ages--how long it is not for us
to know. Many of the remains of the old world are embedded in the crust
of the earth; and from them we learn, that from the first appearance
of life in the vegetable form, up to man, there has been a regular
progressive development. The order seems to have been about thus: 1.
Gross matter; 2. Mineral; 3. Marine Plants; 4. Fish; 5. Reptiles; 6.
Birds; 7. Marsupial; 8. Mamalia; 9. MAN, the flower, the crown, the
lord of creation. All these classes are interlinked, one hand reaching
up, and the other down, and all are ascending in the line of the
spiral, up to man. Every succeeding class is superior to the preceding,
from the first to the last, and each class is moving onward. The last
type of the vegetable kingdom is infinitely superior to the first,
and so of all the other classes. And man of the sixtieth century is
far superior to man of the first century. No miracle was wrought in
bringing any of these species into existence. No law of nature was
violated, or suspended; but all, from the lowest grade up to man, were
brought on to the stage of life according to perfect and immutable
laws, emenating from the great Fountain of the Universe.

Mankind in their infancy were ignorant creatures; as much below the
Indians of the Rocky Mountains, intellectually and morally, as they
are below us. They wandered, naked, in clans, like the Indians of the
West, subsisting on fish, reptiles, and such animals as they could kill
with their simple weapons, and on the spontaneous fruit of the earth,
without shelter by night, or protection from the burning sun or pelting
storm.

Many centuries after this period, about the time the city of Babylon
was founded, although great advancement had been made, yet the mass of
the people were as ignorant as are the aborigines of America. There
were a few highly developed minds, but the great body of the people
were enveloped in mental darkness, of which we can form but faint
conception--fit materials for tyrants and leaders to make machines of,
and they freely used them for such sacrilegious purposes. They were
subject to their leader’s will; were his bone and sinew; his battle
axe and shield. He was the head, they the body. At his will they
suffered and toiled, lived and died, and when their oppressors’ earthly
career closed, they erected pyramids to perpetuate his fame and their
degradation. No effort was made to enlighten and moralize the mass of
mankind, for their masters well knew that ignorant men made the best
tools. No advancement would have been made under such unfavorable
circumstances had not growth been natural to man.

If we trace the history of mankind during the rise and progress of
the Chaldean, Babylonian, Persian and Roman empires, up to the time
Christ was on earth, we find, that although ignorance and degradation
are prominent features of the civilization of those times, yet our
hearts are made glad with clear evidence of human progress. Every
subsequent generation was wiser and better than the previous one.
True, the advancing tide was slow, the current sluggish; sometimes
obstacles would arrest its progress, and even force it back toward its
source, but nature would then redouble her efforts, and sweep away all
obstacles, and press forward with her immortal freight to sunnier skies
and fairer climes.

When the Christian Era opened, it was the golden age of antiquity. The
purity of our Savior’s life, his deep and fervent love for mankind, the
beauty and life-giving energy of the precepts and truths he uttered,
together with the goodness, zeal and extensive labors and sufferings of
his apostles and their associates, gave the human mind an impetus it
had not before known.

The apostles and their coadjutors traversed the Roman empire, which
embraced most of the known world, and denounced Paganism, and every
species of immorality, and called on the nations of the earth to
worship the one living and true God, who made and governs the universe.
They proclaimed, in obedience to their divine Master, that God was the
FATHER OF ALL MANKIND; that the latter compose one great BROTHERHOOD,
and are destined for IMMORTALITY, PROGRESSION and HAPPINESS; and from
these cardinal truths they drew these inferences, and enforced them
with holy life and eloquent speech--that men should exercise brotherly
kindness, general benevolence and charity, and aid each other in
traveling the heavenly road.

Those holy men did not labor in vain. The human soul was quickened into
higher life by the germinating power of truth; and had the gospel been
retained in its purity, and had the social and political condition of
mankind been in a higher sphere of development, and had those favorable
conditions continued to the present time, long ago the Millenium would
have been ushered in. But the gospel was corrupted; the social and
political condition of mankind, although in advance of any previous
period, was in a deplorable state. The Roman heart was rotten, the
Roman empire was corrupt, and before Christianity was proclaimed in
it to much extent, the empire was tottering on its throne, and shaking
from center to circumference; and these precursors of still greater
evils filled the world with terror and confusion. The Pope supplanted
Christ, and Catholicism, Christianity; and the Roman empire, by
political earthquakes, was shaking on its sandy foundation. And to add
to the terrors and disasters of the times, floods of barbarians came
rushing from the north, and the Saracens from the east, like the lava
from Vesuvius, that overwhelmed Herculaneum and Pompeii, and buried the
empire and civilization beneath the flood, and almost extinguished the
light and life of Christianity. Those were the darkest days the world
had seen for many a century.

Human progress then received a check from which it was a long time in
recovering; but the innate tendency of human nature to move onward
finally overcame the mountains that human folly had thrown in its way,
and after the lapse of several centuries it emerged into the light of
science and religion.

The morning twilight which succeeded that long night of anarchy,
priestly rule and superstition, dawned on the world in the fourteenth
century. Intellect, which had slumbered for ages, began to throw off
its lethargy. Universities sprang up in Europe. Science, literature
and religion began to be studied. Old theories were looked into
and questioned; and then the martyr’s fires were rekindled by the
conservatives of that age; for every age has a class who love to stand
up to their ears in mud at their old landmarks, and threaten all with
temporal ruin or eternal damnation, or both, who make an effort to get
out of the filth into the pure air and sunshine of heaven. This old
hunkerism I abhor, whether in church, state, or literature. It would
repress the energies of the world. Our motto should be--go where the
stream of truth bears us, regardless of consequences; they should not
be feared. Error and ignorance only are real and fearful enemies.

Those early pioneers in the domain of truth, paid dear for their
independence and wisdom; many of whom were burned at the stake or
incarcerated in dungeons. But the truths they uttered were not so
easily forced out of the world. A pious poet of those times, speaking
of the disinterment and scattering of Wickliffe’s ashes on the Avon,
utters this prophetic language:

  “The Avon to the Severn runs,
     The Severn to the sea,
   And Wickliffe’s ashes shall be strewn
     Wide as the waters be.”

The martyrs of truth fertilize our soil. The fires that consumed
their bodies lighten our skies. The clanking of their chains, and the
groans they uttered, are yet sounding in our ears, and inspire us with
indignation against despotism of every name and kind. They did as much
for human progress by suffering and dying in its cause as they did by
the pen, speech, or holy life. Their tears and their blood form a river
which has been meandering through the heart of humanity down to the
present time; and all along its margin, little rills have been pouring
into it from the hearts and eyes of those who have been persecuted for
righteousness’ sake. And the stream that was once small has become
large, and will increase every day as it flows on, imparting vitality
to the great heart of humanity. Revere those great men. And although
they may not have known the whole truth, yet they were far in advance
of the age in which they lived, were true friends of man, and we owe
them a lasting debt of gratitude.

And what shall I say of the present condition of the enlightened
nations of the earth? The truth is, never before did man attain
the intellectual and moral eminence he now enjoys; never before was
the human mind so active or making such rapid strides. “The world
is entering on a new moral cycle. The great heart of humanity is
heaving with hopes of a still brighter day. The instincts of our
nature prophesy its approach, and the best intellects of our world are
struggling to turn that prophecy to fulfilment. Thoughts of freedom,
duty, benevolence, equality and human brotherhood agitate the nations
of the earth; and neither the Pope with his Cardinals and Jesuits, nor
the kings with their ministers, can repress it. Were these thoughts
imprisoned in the center of the earth, they would burst its granite
folds, speed onward in their career and fill their destiny. They are
imbued with a deathless vigor. They must prevail, or the idea of a
Moral Governor of the universe is impossible, and the divine truths of
the gospel a fable.”

Old ideas are being modified, or laid aside without a memento to keep
them in remembrance, and new ones from the heavenly mint are taking
their places. The pruning-hook and plough-share are making sad havoc
of grey-bearded theories. But we must not for a moment suppose that
the worshipers of antiquated institutions and ideas, will yield in
this struggle without a desperate effort to preserve their idols. And
no doubt the cry will be raised as of old, “Great is Diana of the
Ephesians;” and multitudes will shout, “Crucify, crucify, all who are
not of our party.”

All who have eyes must see that changes are taking place every where.
Men may shut their eyes and prophesy that all things will continue
as they are; but as Galileo said of the earth, after renouncing his
philosophy to save his life: “IT REVOLVES STILL;” so whether we believe
it or not, the human mind is outgrowing and leaving old errors, which
had their origin in barbarism, and is advancing into the region of
truth and reality.

But the old heavens and earth will not pass away without great
noise--not until the elements shall be melted with fervent heat, by the
Sun of righteousness. The nations of the earth have long fought with
steel and bullet, but now the great battle of ideas is being fought.
The old and the new, the past and the present, the kingdom of God and
the kingdom of satan, have entered the list; and as sure as the rising
sun dispels the darkness, chill, and dampness of night, as sure as day
succeeds night, will truth triumph over error in this conflict. The
hay, wood and stubble will be consumed, but the silver and gold will
pass the fiery ordeal.

Had some conversation with a Spiritualist. The Bible, in his
estimation, is full of lies and absurdities, as unreliable in its
religious instruction as an almanac in its weather prognostics. But
all Spiritualists do not go to that extreme; many of them entertain
sincere respect for that book, and love to cultivate the religious
sentiment. I have a great deal of faith in that kind of Spiritualism.
The old prophets, Christ and his apostles, and multitudes of the wise
and good in all ages, have been Spiritualists of that character. Such
kind of Spiritualism is only another name for Christianity. But with
the irreverent and ungodly sort of Spiritualism, I have no sympathy.
I believe it to be blasting and damning in its influence, and will
ultimately land its believers in rank Atheism. It has already made
shipwreck of many a man and woman, and its dreadful work in that
direction will fearfully increase unless there should be a return to
reason.

I attended a revival meeting while on this journey, and witnessed some
extraordinary doings. There was shouting, ranting, screaming, jumping,
crying and laughing. The preacher told us, that the lowest and vilest
could be instantly translated into saints. I remembered the old song I
had heard on such occasions:

  “Come dirty, come filthy, come ragged, come bare:
   You can’t come too filthy--come just as you are.”

The preacher did not intend to promote immorality, but no doubt this
telling people, that unwashed scoundrels at the end of a long life
in every crime can be instantly transformed into saints of the first
water, and so escape all punishment for a misspent life, has a very
immoral influence. A hardened sinner may to-day right-about face, and
resolve to travel upward hereafter, but he has a long journey before
him. But if he pursues it, he will finally reach the heavenly city, and
walk its golden streets.

A man at the meeting asked me if a person could be “saved without
repentance and regeneration?” I replied:

“You might as well ask if a man can see without eyes, hear without
ears, think without a head, talk without a tongue, or walk without
legs. You misunderstand salvation. It is not from an outward hell, but
from ignorance, error, sin, and all their debasing effects. He who has
thoroughly repented, or reformed, which is the same thing, _is_ saved,
not will be; a regenerated soul _is_ saved, not will be saved at some
future period, and in some other world. Repentance and regeneration
sweep and garnish the soul, make it a fit habitation for the heavenly
guest--salvation. Jesus said, ‘Repent, for the kingdom of God is
at hand.’ It is always ‘at hand,’ ready to be established in every
reformed, regenerated heart.”

Said another, “If Universalism is true, what is the use of preaching?”

“Why, my dear sir,” I answered, “preaching is one means by which
salvation is effected. God works by means. By means of the sun he
lightens and warms the earth; by means of the rain he cools and
purifies the atmosphere, fertilizes the soil, and fills our fountains
with living water. By means of natural laws he controls every globe,
and every particle of matter in the universe. So, by wise and righteous
instrumentalities, he blesses man spiritually, and will continue
to bless him forever and ever. And the proclamation of truth and
righteousness, through the christian ministry, is one means appointed
by heaven to this blessed end. Eighteen hundred years ago Jesus said,
‘Know the truth, and the truth shall make you free;’ and he consecrated
men, and commissioned them, to ‘Go into all the world and preach
the gospel to every creature.’ It is freedom _now_ that we need; it
is salvation _now_, that the proclamation of the truth produces. As
the presence of Jesus brought salvation into Zaccheus’ house, so the
preaching of the gospel brings a present salvation to the soul. Give up
the wretched delusion, that the chief end of preaching is to save us
from a hell beyond the grave. It is for no such a purpose. Its object
is to enlighten and purify man _now_, that he may be happy in this
world.”

In Kimball, I delivered a discourse; and at its close a Methodist
minister told the congregation that he, heart and soul, believed in the
“Restitution of all things;” and that he would not part with that faith
for the world. He said it was the joy of his life; it made him a better
man; it prepared him to live, and he trusted that it would be his stay
and his hope in the hour of death.

I stopped in Moline, Ill., and delivered one discourse. This is a
manufacturing place, at the head of Rock Island, and exhibits much
thrift and enterprise. Said a man to me in the town:

“The Bible says, no self-murderer shall enter the kingdom of God. What
do you do with that passage?”

“That is home-made scripture,” I replied; “there is nothing of the
kind in the Bible. Besides, there never was, and never will be, a
self-murderer. To murder is to ‘kill _with malice aforethought_.’ A
man may commit suicide, but that is not murder, for he does not do it
with malignity or malice toward himself. For the poor suicide I have
much sympathy. Who can estimate the agony he suffered, to escape which,
he took his own life? Have charity for such a poor unfortunate; speak
not harshly of him; condemn him not. Jesus would weep over his grave,
and say, ‘Father, forgive him.’ The apostle John says, ‘Whoso hateth
his brother is a murderer, and ye know, that no murderer hath eternal
life abiding in him.’ 1 John iii. 15. This speaks of the _present
condition_ of the murderer--not his everlasting condition. No murderer
_hath_ eternal life _abiding in him_. Of course he has not, or he would
not be a murderer. Eternal life is Christ-life, heaven-life; a life of
love to God, and good will toward man. A murderer is selfish, cruel,
bloody, revengeful. A murderous character, and a christian character,
cannot exist in one soul. But the murderer may reform. Paul was a
persecutor, assisted in murdering Stephen of blessed memory, but he
reformed. Jesus on the cross prayed God to forgive his murderers.”

“But then suppose he dies a murderer, what will become of him?”

“If the murderer can reform before he dies, why not after he dies? Does
reason, wisdom, goodness, the Bible say, that if a man leaves this
world a sinner, he will be compelled to be a sinner eternally? That is
an assumption of Orthodoxy; but it never was proved, and never will be.
Why does the Bible say, ‘God will have all men to be saved,’ if it is
his purpose that all who leave this world sinners never shall be saved?
Why does he call on all to repent, if he intends, that all who die
impenitent never shall reform? It is a dreadful thing to live or die
a murderer; but the mercy of God can save him in this world, and that
same mercy can save him in the future world.”




CHAPTER XIX.


  LAST CAMPAIGN--IN GALESBURG, ILL.--THE UNITED STATES
  CONVENTION--LOMBARD UNIVERSITY--OTHER SCHOOLS--JOURNEY
  TO MISSOURI--IN MACON CITY--IN BROOKFIELD--ST. JOSEPH
  AND OTHER CITIES--GROVE MEETING--ON THE MISSOURI
  BOTTOM--BEAUTIFUL COUNTRY--PREACH IN FILLMORE AND MANY OTHER
  PLACES--RETURNED HOME--ANTI-ORTHODOX PREACHING--FUNERAL
  SERMONS--DEATH--LIFE--CONCLUSION.

My last long campaign was in Missouri and Illinois. Left Chicago,
accompanied by Mrs. Manford, Tuesday night, September 16, 1866, and by
sunrise the next morning we were in Galesburg, Ill., one hundred and
sixty miles southward. The United States Convention of Universalists
was holding its annual session in that place, and we tarried till its
close. Met many clergymen from the East and West I had not before seen;
and had the satisfaction of shaking hands with W. S. Balch, with whom
I studied many years before, but had not beheld his face since I left
his sanctum in Claremont, N. H., to come West. He is now pastor of
the Universalist society in Galesburg. Years have changed the outer
man, somewhat, but the inner man seems to be as vigorous, generous and
brotherly as ever. Brother Balch has noble qualities of head and heart;
and he has ever been faithful and successful in his high calling.

The Lombard University is located in Galesburg; and although
“University” is rather a big name for such an institution--the West is
fond of high sounding names--it is an excellent school, and is doing
a great work. It combines an academy and college; its doors are open
to both sexes, they having equal privileges. This is as it should be.
The old custom of educating girls and boys apart is all wrong. They
learn faster together than if educated separately. A healthy rivalry
is induced, each sex being anxious to secure the approbation of the
other; besides, associating together, not less in the school-room than
at home tends to refine and invigorate both sexes. The property of this
institution is one hundred thousand dollars, and about as much more has
recently been subscribed for its benefit. It is destined to exert a
vast influence in the West in favor of liberal principles.

The denomination has several other excellent institutions of learning
in the United States. There is Tufts College, located in Medford,
Mass., four miles from Boston. Its funds and real estate are worth
eight hundred and five thousand dollars. It has a library embracing
ten thousand volumes. In Canton, N. Y., we have two schools--the
St. Lawrence University, and Theological School. The University has
property worth one hundred and four thousand dollars. We also have an
academy in Clinton, N. Y., called the Clinton Liberal Institute. It has
property amounting to fifty thousand dollars. We likewise have a school
in Westbrook, Me., three miles from Portland. It is one of the best
institutions in the state, and its permanent fund is thirty thousand
dollars. The Green Mountain Institute is located in Woodstock, Vt. A
fine farm is connected with the school, and the average attendance is
about one hundred. In Glover, Vt., the Orleans Liberal Institute is
located. From seventy to one hundred pupils attend it, and its friends
intend to increase its usefulness.

There are three other educational institutions being established by the
denomination. One in Jefferson, Wis. It has so far progressed, that
one term has been held. A fine academy building will soon be erected.
In Barre, sixteen miles from Montpelier, the capital of Vermont, our
brethren are establishing a school. Fifty thousand dollars have already
been subscribed. In Franklin, Mass., a first class academy will soon
be in operation. Dr. Dean, its founder, donated sixty thousand dollars,
and the trustees have raised forty thousand more. A magnificent
building is nearly finished on a beautiful site, with ample grounds.

This is a pretty fair record for so young a denomination as ours; and
all this has been accomplished in about thirty-five years. But our work
is only fairly begun in the educational field. More schools must be
established; and those already in operation must be strengthened, and
their usefulness increased. Proper education improves the head and the
heart, and qualifies us to act with dignity and success our part on the
stage of life.

September 20th. Mrs. Manford returned to Chicago, and at 5 o’clock
P. M., I took cars for Quincy, one hundred miles south; and the next
morning was steaming across the Missouri prairies to Macon City, sixty
miles west of the great river. Most of the country is prairie, high,
dry and rolling, with good soil, but thinly settled. Saw large herds of
cattle, horses, mules and sheep, feeding on the vast savannas. Lectured
in Macon City. A good congregation would immediately be gathered here,
if a minister could be obtained. Two lawyers, especially, expressed
much anxiety for such an arrangement. Macon is at the crossing of the
Hannibal and St. Joseph, and North Missouri railroads, and is bound to
be an important town.

September 22d. Rode to Brookfield, forty miles west. Crossed the
dividing ridge between the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, two of the
great rivers of the world. Most of the country is hilly, timber is
plenty, and the soil middling. Brookfield is exactly midway between the
two rivers. The railroad company has its machine shops here, and the
town is in a flourishing condition. The country around is beautiful
and productive. It is a charming locality for a home. Rode into the
country the next day, Sunday, eight miles, and talked to the people;
returned in the afternoon, and lectured to a fair congregation.

September 25th. Proceeded to Chillicothe, forty miles toward the
setting sun, and delivered my message. This is a fine town, and
improving rapidly. We ought to have a church here, and could soon have
one if proper effort was made. We always have large congregations here.
I. M. Westfall, several years since, had a discussion in this place
with a Methodist minister, and he made the dry bones shake.

September 27th. Journeyed to St. Joseph, about seventy miles. This is
the largest town in North Missouri. It is located on the east bank
of the Missouri river; has quite a city appearance; the streets are
paved, and the business houses are chiefly brick, and of a substantial
character. This, and three other towns within seventy-five miles, are
striving for the mastery--Kansas City, Leavenworth and Lawrence. Time
only will determine which will win. But there is bound to be one large
commercial center somewhere in this region. Which of the four will be
that city? I refer to 1875 for an answer.

September 28th. Rode to Savannah, thirteen miles northward, and
lectured in the evening. R. K. Jones, an active and enterprising man,
preaches here monthly. Expect to spend three weeks traveling where
there are no railroads; and as I have no conveyance of my own, shall
depend on a kind Providence, and good friends for transportation.

September 29th. Rode horseback to Fillmore, ten miles; a sprightly boy
went with me to lead the horse back; and on the next day, Sunday, was
conveyed by a friend, to Mound City, eighteen miles, where I delivered
a long discourse at eleven o’clock, in a beautiful grove, and in the
evening spoke in a school-house, four miles distant.

October 1st. Rode a borrowed horse twelve miles, and lectured at
night. Was sick two days from excessive speaking. Met a woman who heard
me in Ohio twenty-five years ago. Am now sixty miles above St. Joseph,
on the Missouri river bottom. The soil is as rich as was that of the
far-famed valley of Egypt. Most of the bottom is prairie, and the
land dry, warm and easily tilled. It is a charming region--beautiful
beyond description. A few miles west, the Missouri bluffs in Kansas and
Nebraska are visible. Although barely able to sit on the horse, I rode
twelve miles.

October 4th. The ride did me good--am all right again. Went in a buggy
to Oregon, twelve miles, and heard an excellent discourse by R. K.
Jones. About one year previous, I delivered three discourses in this
town, the first of the kind heard there, and they caused considerable
excitement; whereupon Mr. Smith, a Presbyterian clergyman, proposed
debating, to which I consented. We settled the preliminaries; but Mr.
Smith’s ardor for the discussion soon abated, and the subject was
dropped. But another party is now trying to get up a discussion with
me, and they are corresponding with Mr. Summerhill, of Cincinnati,
Ohio, a noted minister in his order, about engaging in it.

October 5th. Went to Fillmore--rode part way, and walked part way--and
lectured in the evening. A society will probably soon be organized
here, as we have a goodly number of friends within a few miles of the
place. At a previous visit to this town, a preacher replied to my
discourse. There were several clergymen of different denominations
present, and they delegated this one to be spokesman. But he yielded
so much that his colleagues were disgusted and said, “he might as well
have proclaimed himself a Universalist.”

October 7th. A friend conveyed me on Sunday morning, to Whitesville,
eighteen miles, where I spoke on that day twice. Here also a society
could be formed.

October 8th. A gentleman and lady took me in a buggy to Rochester,
sixteen miles, where I spoke to a large congregation, but found only a
few who sympathized with me.

October 9th. A kind friend conveyed me to my next appointment, in
Maysville, twenty-five miles eastward. He took his three boys with him,
he said, that they might see the country for they were all recently
from Ohio. Men and boys were delighted with the country we passed over,
as well they might be, for it is a lovely land--high, rolling, rich
prairie. A large number attended the meeting. Probably not a dozen
present had before heard a discourse on the Restitution. I hope some
good seed was sown, and, that it will germinate, bud, blossom, and
yield a rich harvest.

October 10th. Rode twenty-five miles to-day, and preached at night, and
the next day. These were the first sermons on our faith ever heard in
Gallatin. A Congregationalist minister gave notice that he should reply
to them, two days subsequently. In a conversation with him he remarked,
that his denomination were the “_liberals_ of the evangelical school.”
They may be in the West, but they certainly are not in the East. Their
creed is cold, cruel, intolerant, Calvinism. There is not a particle of
liberality or generosity in it. It is as rigid as iron bars, and cold
as icebergs.

October 12th. Rode horseback sixteen miles, to Bancroft, and lectured.
Although our liberal faith had not before been publicly taught here,
I found many friends. A large family by the name of Hendricks, all
formerly Dunkards, reside here, and they are devoted believers in the
Restitution. Most of that denomination, I have met with, agree with
us in the final redemption of humanity, and they are generally truly
christian people. Elhanan Winchester once said, “If God has a people on
earth, it is the Dunkards.”

October 13th. A friend took me to Trenton, eighteen miles, where I
delivered three sermons. They were the first of the kind in the town,
or county, and large numbers attended. A preacher did his best to
keep the people away, but he was nearly deserted, for the people were
bound to hear the “new doctrine.” I here met a man by the name of John
Murray, who said he was a distant relative of the sainted Rev. John
Murray. When I was in Iowa City recently, I found a man by the name of
Winchester, who is a relative of Rev. Elhanan Winchester, of blessed
memory. They have good blood in their veins.

October 15th. Conveyed to Lindville, fifteen miles, and preached at
night. The people here had not before heard one of our faith. Some
believed, and some disbelieved.

October 16th. Rode fourteen miles on horseback, and walked six miles.
Came to a stream where there was no bridge, and pulling off boots and
socks, waded through, and passed on to fill my appointments. Lectured
twice in this place, Milan, to full houses.

October 18th. Went to Greencastle, fifteen miles, and lectured twice.
There is a small society in this village, and two brother preachers are
residing near by--W. Brise and G. S. Ayers. It is to be hoped they will
hereafter devote more of their time to the ministry.

October 20th. Lectured in Unionville twice, and once in the
neighborhood; and the next day was conveyed by a friend to Lancaster,
twenty miles still farther onward, where I also spoke twice. The next
day, rode to Memphis, or rather rode and walked, twenty-five miles,
where I spoke twice, and once in the country. From thence was conveyed
by a friend to Bentonsport, Iowa, where I took the cars and went home.

I recently heard a discourse by one of our ministers, and he gave
Orthodoxy an awful cudgeling. I do not like that kind of preaching.
It is too much of the meat-axe order. The christian minister should
preach the gospel in all its fulness--present it in its doctrinal,
moral, and spiritual aspect. But cutting, slashing, and banging, at
this creed, and that creed, at this sect and that sect, is not exactly
preaching the gospel. It may be the minister’s duty, now and then,
under peculiar circumstances, to handle other creeds without gloves;
but let him remember and do his duty in this respect in a loving
spirit. But there should be but little of this kind of controversial
sermonizing. Telling people of the beauty and glory of truth and
virtue, and urging a practical knowledge of the same, is far better
than to be fighting Orthodoxy. It must be admitted, that some of the
fathers of our denomination, in this respect, have set a bad example.
They had too much of the Ishmaelite spirit, and many of us have imbibed
of it copiously. True, they were assailed by slander and falsehood, in
private and in public, at home and abroad, when they went in, and when
they went out; and it required a copious infusion of the Divine Spirit
to be perfect lambs under such circumstances. And our people in the
West and South, especially the ministers, are still pursued with the
same maliciousness, injustice and cruelty, and it requires remarkable
good nature to be thus treated without striking back. But some of us
have rather overdone this matter of “using up” Orthodoxy. Not, it is
to be hoped, that we have been actuated by the fiendish spirit of some
of our enemies, but we spend too much precious time, and waste too
much material, on their creeds. Better present the truth in its native
beauty and grace, and the world will soon fall in love with it, and
take it to it’s heart.

I had been at home but a few days, when I was called to the southern
part of Illinois, to deliver two funeral discourses. One of them was on
the occasion of the death of Mrs. Middleworth, an estimable woman, cut
down in the vigor of womanhood, and in the midst of usefulness. A large
number attended the service; some came as far as fifteen miles. Surely,
if ever we need consolation, it is when death enters our abode, and
snatches therefrom a dear friend. Sensitive ties are then severed, and
affection’s nerves receive a dreadful shock. The death of a friend is
like an untimely frost on an orange grove; it may indeed kill but one,
but it blights the whole grove. But death is no new thing under the
sun. For six thousand years mankind have been dying. It is estimated
that sixty persons die every minute. Every hour in the day, week,
month, year, century, thousands of human beings breathe their last
breath, and heave their last sigh. All over the world are dying scenes,
and funeral scenes. An army of the living are employed to bury an army
of the dead. And this sad work has been going on for sixty centuries.

How true are the words of the wise man: “One generation passeth
away, and another generation cometh.” Death and the grave are never
satisfied. The high and the low, the old and the young, the saint and
the sinner, must alike be prostrated in death when the king of terror
hurls his unerring dart. As ocean wave succeeds wave, so generation of
men succeed generation, and each in its turn is borne to, and dashes
and dies upon the fearful shore of time. Every thing on earth speaks of
mutation and death. The lofty marble monument, erected to commemorate
human genius; the stately palace of wealth, pomp and greatness, are
being crumbled to dust by the busy and untiring hand of time. Saith the
Bible, “All flesh is grass.” As the grass withereth, and the flower
fadeth, so with mortal man. The decree has gone forth from the court
of heaven, and cannot be revoked, “Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt
thou return.” No appeal is admitted; no reversal of the judgment need
be expected. _Die we all must!_ But how little is this dreadful fact
realized by many! How many spend life as if they believed it would
never end! To the accumulation of earthly treasures, or the advancement
of ambitious schemes, multitudes devote all their energy, all their
talent, all their precious time. Unwise men! God made us for more noble
pursuits; and he who devotes all of life’s blessed moments to the
accumulation of earth’s perishable treasures, answers not to the end
of his being, is not a friend to himself, but rather his own greatest
enemy.

But when the decrees of the Almighty shall be executed; when dust shall
have returned to dust, and ashes to ashes, shall we be no more forever?
Will death never yield his prey? Shall we share the fate of the beetle
and the worm? Will the tender ties of love and affection, which are
severed by the cold hand of death, with weeping eyes and bleeding
heart, never be reunited? And when we consign our dear friends to the
grave, shall we never more behold them? Never more enjoy their society,
which society made a heaven of earth? And when we shall bid farewell
to earth, and close our eyes in death, shall we be annihilated? Some
there are, who answer these important questions in the affirmative.
Some there are, who tell us, that death is an eternal sleep, that the
grave and the worm will devour our all; that we are like the bubble
on the wide ocean, seen for a moment, and then disappear to be known
no more forever. But thank God, we have reason to hope for better
things. We have reason to hope that there is a life beyond this life,
a world beyond this world, where friends will meet, where the great
family of God will meet, to part no more; that on the blissful plains
of immortality, the severed links of humanity will be welded in an
immortal chain, never more to be severed.

While in the neighborhood where this service was held, I delivered two
other discourses, to great congregations. From thence I went to Dudley,
and delivered another funeral discourse, on the occasion of the death
of Mrs. Sutherland, a devoted believer in our most holy faith, and an
excellent woman. It is sometimes said by the opposers of the Great
Salvation, that it is good to live by, but not to die by. But it seems
to me, that what is good to live by, must be good to die by, for what
prepares us to live, prepares us to die. When the opposer tells me,
that my religion “is good to live by,” I thank him for such testimony
in its favor; but I cannot return the compliment, cannot admit that
his creed, let it be what it may, if it denies the essential features
of the Restitution, “is good to live by.” Is Atheism, which denies a
God, and orphanizes the world, “good to live by?” Is Deism, that denies
a Savior, and doubts an hereafter, “good to live by?” Is Partialism,
that represents God as cruel, revengeful and unjust; as loving some and
hating others; blessing some and cursing others, world without end,
“good to live by?” Men can live with such creeds in their heads, as
they can live on horse ham and mule stake; but it is living at a poor
dying rate.

But then, this faith so full of grace “is not good to die by.” But
why not? It represents God as a universal Father, Christ a universal
Savior, and heaven the home to which all are tending. Is not faith in
such a God, such a Savior, and such a Destiny, good in the hour of
death? The truth is, nothing but this can afford peace and consolation
in that dark and solemn hour. Atheism, Deism, Partialism, are found
wanting in man’s dying moments, as when in the possession of health and
vigor. True, many close their eyes in death with blissful hopes, who do
not accept the faith of God’s Universal Grace, and for this reason--in
their dying hour they gaze entirely on the bright side of their creed,
for it has a bright side as well as a dark side. They think they can
read their “title clear to mansions in the skies,” hence depart in
peace. But if they looked for an instant on the dark side of their
faith; if they considered that they may be mistaken with regard to
their own salvation, and instead of going to heaven may go to hell. And
then, around their dying couch are their near and dear friends; and for
aught they know, all of them in a few years will be lifting up their
eyes in eternal torment, and begging for a drop of water to cool their
flaming tongues--if the dying deemed this possible, and it is possible
if Orthodoxy is true, would not the thought turn joy into the bitterest
sorrow, and songs of praise into howls of despair? But the truth is
adapted to all stages and conditions of humanity. It is our counselor,
guide, and hope, in the strength and vigor of manhood; our staff in
sickness and old age; our _all_ when our eyes are closing in death, and
the grave is opening at our feet.

After speaking in five other places in the south part of the state,
I returned home; and had been there but two days, when a telegraphic
despatch summoned me to attend the funeral of Mrs. Jameson, in Marshall
county, Ill., over one hundred miles distant. When turning away from
her grave, her husband remarked: “There is buried one of the best women
that ever lived.” That is the best eulogy that can be pronounced over
the grave of the dead. The departed suffered for months, by day and by
night, the most excruciating physical agony, but not a murmur dropped
from her lips. She knew that sickness was unto death, and she welcomed
the approach of the angel of deliverance. A good life and a christian
faith, are blessed friends in the sunset of life. As I am writing about
the last page of this book, a letter, with a black border, from a woman
in Missouri is received, announcing the death of her husband, and
requesting me to attend his funeral. It was his desire, she writes,
that I should do so, and I must respect his dying wish.

The common view of death, I am satisfied, is too dark and gloomy. When
we look upon the cold and rigid form, the closed eyes and pale brow, of
the dead, a sense of gloom, and a vague feeling of fear comes over us;
but we should remember, that the being that lately animated that now
lifeless body, is a resident of the “house not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens.” But we are oppressed too much by what we see, and have
not faith enough in the reality of a life in heaven. And hence it is,
that in the chamber of death, at the time of the Holy Passover, bitter
sobbings are heard, in the place of song of rejoicing; and hence it is
that the coffin, our second cradle, is followed to the grave by those
who are arrayed in gloomy habiliments expressive of grief and sorrow.
To those who have passed into the house of “many mansions,” death must
appear in a very different light. The two grand eras in our life below,
its beginning and its close, birth and death, must be viewed by them as
really beautiful and equally divine. The departed know by experience
what death is. They have tasted the cup, and know that it contains, not
a poisonous draught, but the wine of life. They know that this is a
world of shadows, not the world above.

When the hour of death arrives, the couch of the dying is surrounded by
invisible friends, as by those who still abide in the flesh; and one
hand of the dying is held by those to whom he is now to bid adieu; and
the other is taken by those whom the eye of flesh can no longer see.
“On the one side, there is weeping and almost despair; on the other,
the joyful hymn of welcome. Surely tears are a relief to men in this
mortal state; and I would not even seem to say that they are wrong. I
say only this, that the occasion of our most intense grief, would be no
occasion of grief, were death understood by us as it is by those who
know by experience--by that holy experience--what it is. Were we able
to follow, with open eyes, those who are dear to us, as they pass away,
and see them as they are in the Better Land, and know how they are
surrounded and employed, we should not mourn as we now do when friends
depart, nor should we feel any temptation thus to mourn, and the fear
of death would be wholly unknown to us.”

This, I believe, to be the correct view of death; and its general
prevalence would dispel the gloom that now hangs over the grave, and
save the world many tears and griefs. The day will come when the
inhabitants of the earth, having a proper estimate of death, and
the hereafter, will wonder that we regarded death with the gloomy
apprehension we do. When that day blesses the world, there will be no
more death, as most of mankind now regard it.

       *       *       *       *       *

To conclude: I have innumerable reasons to be grateful to Almighty
God, that I have lived so long, enjoyed almost uninterrupted good
health, had so many friends, and been permitted to labor in the gospel
ministry. Truly, the Lord has blessed me all the days of my life. I
have never had but two spells of sickness, and they were induced by
hard labor in hot weather. Notwithstanding my extensive traveling, I
have never met with the slightest accident, and I have journeyed by
sea and land, in sailing vessels and steamboats, on railroads and on
horseback, in stages, and in wagons of all descriptions. Have traveled
in dangerous localities by day and by night, but a penknife is the
largest weapon I ever carried. One more personal remark--I never
snuffed, chewed, or smoked tobacco; neither did I ever poison my body
or my soul with a glass of liquor--do not know whisky from brandy, and
do not covet the knowledge.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication, except that obvious typographical errors have
been corrected.

The following changes were made:

p. 107: as inserted (now as it was)

p. 110: partially obscured word mporal assumed to be temporal (in
temporal ruin.)

p. 299: art changed to act (the act of)

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-FIVE YEARS IN THE
WEST ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact.

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
